Opinion Cancer Screening—The Good, the Bad, and the UglyH.GilbertWelch,MD, MPH Center for Surgery and Public Health, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts. Corresponding Author: H. Gilbert Welch, MD, MPH, Center for Surgery and Public Health, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, 1620 Tremont St, Ste 2-016, Boston, MA 02120 (drgilwelch@ gmail.com). jamasurgery.com In clinical practice to say that a person has cancer gives as little information about the possible course of his disease as to say that he has an infection. There are dangerous infec.tions thatmay be fatal andthereare harmless infections that are self-limited or may disappear. The same is true of can.cers. Cancer is not a single entity. It is a broad spectrum of diseases related to each other only in name. George Crile, MD, cancer surgeon1(p128) Dr Crile’s recognition of the heterogeneity of cancer growth in a 1955 issue of LIFE magazine presaged why early cancer detection might defy simple intuition. It is temptingtothinkthatcancerscreeningcanonlyhelpin.dividuals and that all survivors of cancer detected by screeningprovidepowerfulevidencethatitsaveslives. However, cancer screening is counterintuitive. It turns out that the harms are more certain than the benefits; the survivors are less likely to be evidence of its benefit and more likely to be evidence of its harms. It was probably Dr Crile who initially introduced the barnyard pen analogy—birds, rabbits, and turtles—to de.scribetheheterogeneityofcancer.Thebirdshavealready escaped the barnyard: they are the fastest growing and most aggressive cancers, those that have already spread bythetimetheyaredetectable.Screeningcannothelpwith thebirds;thequestioniswhethertreatmentcan.Therab.bitsaremoreslowlyprogressivecancers,andtheycanbe caughtearly.Theyarethecancerswithwhichscreeningcan potentiallyhelp.Thentherearetheturtles:there’snoneed catch them becausethey’renot goinganywhere anyway. Limited (or Uncertain) Benefit The goal of cancer screening is to reduce cancer mortal.ity. But the existence of birds necessarily limits its effec.tiveness.Screeningtendstomissthefastestgrowingcan.cersbecausethesecancershavesuchashorttimewindow during which they are detectable by screening, but they are not clinically evident. Furthermore, effective screen.ingrequiresnotonlyearlierdetection,butalsotreatment initiated earlier is reliably better than treatment initiated later.Althoughthisisoftentrueforacutedisease(suchas cardiovascular emergencies), it may not be for long-term disease. Detecting cancerous tumors that are a few milli.meterssmallerthanthosedetectedpreviouslymaymake less difference than what was once believed, particularly aswelearnthattumorbiologyismorerelevantthanitssize. These factors explain why the most favorable effects ob.servedinrandomizedtrialsofscreeningtestsresultinaless than one-third reduction in cancer mortality.2 Ironically, as cancer treatment improves, the ben.efitofscreeningdecays.Ifclinicallydetectedcancercan be routinely treated successfully, the utility of cancer screening naturally falls to zero. (For example, why do wenotscreenforpneumonia?Theanswerisbecausewe can treat pneumonia.) Poorly Recognized (or Hidden) Harms From an individual’s perspective, overdiagnosis is the mostconsequentialharmofscreening.Overdiagnosisre.flects the existence of turtles: abnormalities that meet thepathologiccriteriaforcanceryetarenotdestinedto causeeithersymptomsordeath.Screeningisverygood at finding turtles: it disproportionally detects slow.growing and small cancers—cancers that are biologi.cally favorable.3 However, we physicians are not very good at distinguishing turtles from rabbits. Conse.quently, we tend to treat everybody given a cancer di.agnosis. Because there is nothing to fix, patients with overdiagnosed cancers cannot benefit from treat.ment, but they can be harmed by it. Because overdiagnosis is so rarely confirmed in an individual(ie,apatientwithacancerthatisdetectedby screening but is not treated, never develops symp.toms, and dies of some other cause), there was consid.erable debate about whether the problem really ex.isted. However, overdiagnosis can be easily confirmed at the population level (Figure).4 Thus, debates about the existence of overdiagnosis are now largely settled and have rightly moved to the question about its fre.quency—andhowmuchitmatters.Inthecaseofbreast, prostate,skin,andthyroidcancerscreening,patientsare morelikelytoexperiencetheharmofoverdiagnosisthan they are the benefit of screening—avoiding a cancer death. Nevertheless, overdiagnosis remains, thank.fully, a relatively rare event. From the population perspective, the most conse.quentialharmsrelatetothedynamicsofscreening:many individualsmustbescreenedtopotentiallybenefitavery few. For cancer screening in the general population (ie, not targeting an extremely high-risk group, such as screeningheavysmokersforlungcancer),roughly1000 people must be screened to avert 1 cancer death in 10 years.2Thus,questionsaboutwhathappenstotheother 999 individuals become relevant. False alarms affect many:thereare asmanyas 600false-positive resultsin a10-yearcourseofmammography.5 However, the big.gerproblemisthatmanypeople with false-positive test results are not told that the test was wrong, but rather thatsomethingiswrongwiththem.Thesepeoplearetold that they have a lesion with cellular atypia or dysplasia, ortheythemselvesaremorevulnerabletodevelopcan.cer and thus require more frequent testing. Even the screening campaigns induce vulnerability—the fear of cancer—asameanstopersuadepeopletogetscreened.6 Thus, cancer screening injects a sense of “dis”-ease into the population. Misleading Feedback, Financial Incentives, and Distraction These harms might be acceptable were they accompa.nied by substantial and certain benefit. Unfortunately, JAMA Surgery Published online April 6, 2022 E1 © 2022 American Medical Association. All rights reserved. Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ by Luigi Naldi on 04/07/2022 Opinion Viewpoint Figure. Epidemiologic Signatures of Overdiagnosis Signature for overdiagnosis Signature for overdiagnosis and failure to advance time of diagnosisA sustained rise in cancer incidence coupled with stable mortality (A) suggests overdiagnosis superimposed on stable true cancer occurrence. Rising early-stage cancer incidence coupled with stable late-stage incidence (B) also suggests overdiagnosis and that increased early cancer detection efforts have not produced the desired result: a decline in the rate at which individuals Late stage Stage distribution Late stage present with late-stage cancer (early detection has failed to advance the time of diagnosis of those cancers destined to present at a late stage). Signatures under the condition of stable true cancer occurrence across time. If true cancer occurrence were changing, incidence and mortality would be expected to move in tandem, as would early and late-stage disease.4 screeningitselfprovides misleading feedback thatalwayssuggests itismorebeneficialthanitreallyis.Aftertheonsetofscreening,cli.nicians note a shift in stage distribution: the proportion of cancers presenting in the late stage of development falls, even if this is sim.plyanartifactofmoreearlydiagnosisandnotfewerinstancesoflate presentation. As shown in the example in panel B of the Figure, the proportion of late-stage cancers detected falls from 50% to 25%, despite no change in late-stage incidence. Overtime,5-yearsurvivalrisesowingtothecombinedassocia.tion of lead time and overdiagnosis bias, even if the age of death is unchanged. Survivor stories are particularly pernicious: the more overdiagnosis from screening, the more people there are who be.lievethattheyowetheirlifetothetest—andthemorepopularscreen.ingbecomes.7Screeningcampaignsroutinelymakeuseofthismis.leading feedback; they point to higher survival rates and cancer survivors as evidence supporting screening. Cancer screening is typically motivated by a genuine belief in its value, but it has also become an important revenue stream for volume-driven medical care systems in the US. Although multiple payers are a barrier to nationwide accounting, US expenditures related to screening are substantial: my back-of-the-envelope esti.mate is $40 to $80 billion per year.8 These expenditures represent revenues for the system—revenues not only from screening itself but also from the diagnostic and therapeutic services it triggers. The importance of this revenue stream was highlighted after the sub.stantial decline in screening that occurred after the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. Although other services and businesses remained closed, screening was rapidly restored within a few months.9,10 Dr Crile believed that medical care should be driven by patient needs, not surgeon needs (or now, system needs). He recognized there was a price to be paid for getting ahead of symptoms. Al.though cancer screening may make sense in selected high-risk in.dividuals, I believe general population screening, as currently prac.ticed in the US, has become a huge distraction to our core work. It distracts the system away from acutely ill and injured patients: as physicianperformanceismeasuredintermsofhowfrequentlythey test the well and not how well they care for the sick. General popu.lationscreeningdistractspatientsandpolicymakersawayfromthe genuine determinants of human health. The tremendous re.sources involved in screening—in terms of money, people, and ef.fort—would be better directed elsewhere. ARTICLE INFORMATION Published Online: April 6, 2022. doi:10.1001/jamasurg.2022.0669 Conflict of Interest Disclosures: None reported. REFERENCES 1. Crile G Jr. A plea against blind fear of cancer. Life. 1955;128-142. 2. Welch HG. Evidence on cancer screening efficacy in randomized trials & effectiveness in US practice. Accessed March 2, 2022. https://csph. brighamandwomens.org/wp-content/uploads/ 2021/12/Evidence-on-Cancer-Screening-Efficacy-in.Randomized-Trials-Effectiveness-in-United-States.Practice.pdf 3. Lannin DR, Wang S. Are small breast cancers good because they are small or small because they are good? N Engl J Med. 2017;376(23):2286-2291. doi:10.1056/NEJMsr1613680 4. Welch HG, Kramer BS, Black WC. Epidemiologic signatures in cancer. N Engl J Med. 2019;381(14): 1378-1386. doi:10.1056/NEJMsr1905447 5. Hubbard RA, Kerlikowske K, Flowers CI, Yankaskas BC, Zhu W, Miglioretti DL. Cumulative probability of false-positive recall or biopsy recommendation after 10 years of screening mammography: a cohort study. Ann Intern Med. 2011;155(8):481-492. doi:10.7326/0003-4819-155-8.201110180-00004 6. Woloshin S, Schwartz LM, Black WC, Kramer BS. Cancer screening campaigns—getting past uninformative persuasion. N Engl J Med. 2012;367 (18):1677-1679. doi:10.1056/NEJMp1209407 7. Raffle AE, Gray JM. Screening: Evidence and Practice. 2nd ed. Oxford University Press; 2019. 8. Welch HG. Estimating annual expenditures for cancer screening in the US. Accessed March 2, 2022. https://csph.brighamandwomens.org/wp.content/uploads/2021/12/Estimating-Annual.Expenditures-for-Cancer-Screening-in-the-United.States.pdf 9. Chen RC, Haynes K, Du S, Barron J, Katz AJ. Association of cancer screening deficit in the US with the COVID-19 pandemic. JAMA Oncol. 2021;7 (6):878-884. doi:10.1001/jamaoncol.2021.0884 10. Mazer B. When cancer screening stopped. September 5, 2021. Accessed March 2, 2022. https://www.theatlantic.com/health/archive/2021/ 09/when-cancer-screening-stopped/619994/ E2 JAMA Surgery Published online April 6, 2022 jamasurgery.com © 2022 American Medical Association. All rights reserved. Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ by Luigi Naldi on 04/07/2022 