FROM THE ACADEMY Guidelines of care for the management of acne vulgaris Rachel V. Reynolds, MD (Co-Chair),a Howa Yeung, MD, MSc,b Carol E.Cheng,MD,c Fran Cook-Bolden, MD,d Seemal R. Desai, MD,e,f KellyM.Druby,BSN,g Esther E. Freeman, MD, PhD,h Jonette E. Keri, MD, PhD,i,j Linda F. Stein Gold, MD,k JerryK.L.Tan,MD,l,m Megha M. Tollefson, MD,n Jonathan S. Weiss, MD,b,o PeggyA.Wu, MD,MPH,p Andrea L. Zaenglein, MD,q Jung Min Han, PharmD, MS,r andJohnS.Barbieri, MD,MBA (Co-Chair)s Background: Acne vulgaris commonly affects adults, adolescents, and preadolescents aged 9 years or older. Objective: The objective of this study was to provide evidence-based recommendations for the management of acne. Methods: A work group conducted a systematic review and applied the Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development, and Evaluation approach for assessing the certainty of evidence and formulating and grading recommendations. Results: This guideline presents 18 evidence-based recommendations and 5 good practice statements. Strong recommendations are made for benzoyl peroxide, topical retinoids, topical antibiotics, and oral doxycycline. Oral isotretinoin is strongly recommended for acne that is severe, causing psychosocial burden or scarring, or failing standard oral or topical therapy. Conditional recommendations are made for topical clascoterone, salicylic acid, and azelaic acid, as well as for oral minocycline, sarecycline, combined oral contraceptive pills, and spironolactone. Combining topical therapies with multiple mechanisms of action, limiting systemic antibiotic use, combining systemic antibiotics with topical therapies, and adding intralesional corticosteroid injections for larger acne lesions are recommended as good practice statements. Limitations: Analysis is based on the best available evidence at the time of the systematic review. Conclusions: These guidelines provide evidence-based recommendations for the management of acne vulgaris. ( J Am Acad Dermatol https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaad.2023.12.017.) Key words: Acne; acne vulgaris; adapalene; antiandrogens; antibiotics; azelaic acid; azithromycin; benzoyl peroxide; clascoterone; clindamycin; contraceptives; corticosteroids; Cutibacterium acnes; diet and acne; doxycycline; erythromycin; grading and classiﬁcation of acne; guidelines; hormonal therapy; isotretinoin; light therapies; microbiological and endocrine testing; minocycline; retinoids; salicylic acid; sarecycline; spironolactone; tazarotene; treatment; tretinoin; trifarotene. From the Department of Dermatology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, Massachusettsa; Department of Derma.tology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgiab; Division of Dermatology, Department of Medicine, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, Californiac; Department of Dermatology, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, New Yorkd; Innovative Dermatology, Plano, Texase; Department of Derma.tology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texasf; Penn State Health Hampden Medical Center, Enola, Pennsylvaniag; Department of Dermatology, Massachusetts Gen.eral Hospital, Boston, Massachusettsh; University of Miami, Miller School of Medicine, Miami, Floridai; Miami VA Medical Center, Miami, Floridaj; Department of Dermatology, Henry Ford Health, Detroit, Michigank; Western University, London, Ontario, Cana.dal; Windsor Clinical Research Inc., Windsor, Ontario, Canadam; Departments of Dermatology and Pediatrics, Mayo Clinic, Ro.chester, Minnesotan; Georgia Dermatology Partners, Snellville, Georgiao; Department of Dermatology, University of California Davis,Sacramento,Californiap; Departments ofDermatology and Pediatrics, Penn State/Hershey Medical Center, Hershey, Penn.sylvaniaq; American Academy of Dermatology, Rosemont, Illi.noisr; and Department of Dermatology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts.s Funding sources: This study was funded in total by internal funds from the American Academy of Dermatology. Note: The ‘‘Executive summary: Guidelines of care for the man.agement of acne vulgaris’’ is available as supplementary material. Accepted for publication December 5, 2023. Correspondence to: Jung Min Han, PharmD, MS, American Academy of Dermatology, 9500 Bryn Mawr Ave, Suite 500, Rosemont, IL 60018. E-mail: jminhan@aad.org. Published online February 8, 2024. 0190-9622/$36.00  2024 by the American Academy of Dermatology, Inc. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaad.2023.12.017 1.e1 SCOPE AND OBJECTIVES questions with prespecified patient, intervention, Acne vulgaris is one of the most common skin comparator, and outcome and study eligibility conditions diagnosed and treated by dermatologists criteria (Table I and Supplementary Tables I-VII, in the United States (US) and worldwide.1,2 These available via Mendeley at https://data.mendeley. guidelines aim to provide evidence-based recommen-com/datasets/z2bmdwwdf9/2). The Work Group dations to guide the clinical management of acne consisted of 9 board-certified dermatologists vulgaris for adults, adolescents, and preadolescents (including 1 methodologist and 1 measure represen.aged 9 years or older from the tative and medical writer), 3 perspectives of US and board-certified pediatric der-Canadian dermatologists, cli.matologists, 1 staff liaison, nicians who treat acne, and and 1 patient representative. d The American Academy of The work group employed patients. These guidelines up.Dermatology’s 2016 guidelines for the the Grading of Recommen.date the 2016 American management of acne vulgaris are dations, Assessment, Deve-Academy of Dermatology updated with a systematic review, which lopment, and Evaluation guidelines of care for the 3 resulted in 18 evidence-based approach for assessing themanagement of acne. We recommendations and 5 good practice certainty of the evidence examine evidence based on statements. and formulating and grading a systematic review of the dliterature on acne grading Strong recommendations are made for clinical recommendations. and classification, laboratory topical benzoyl peroxide, retinoids, and/ This approach incorporates testing, and treatment using or antibiotics and their fixed-dose benefits and harms, patient topical therapies, systemic combinations, and for oral doxycycline. values and preferences, antibiotics, hormonal agents, Oral isotretinoin is strongly resource use, and certainty oral isotretinoin, physical mo-recommended for severe acne, acne of evidence as key factors in dalities, complementary and causing psychosocial burden or scarring, the evidence to decision alternative medicine, and di-or acne failing standard treatment with framework (Supplementary etary and environmental in-oral or topical therapy. Table X, available via terventions. These guidelines Mendeley at https://data. d Conditional recommendations are made mendeley.com/datasets/z2bm focus on acne treatments that for the use of topical clascoterone, dwwdf9/2). Strength of reco-are available, approved by salicylic acid, azelaic acid, oral mmendation and strength ofthe US Food and Drug minocycline, sarecycline, combined oral the supporting evidence Administration (FDA), and contraceptives, and spironolactone. were expressed as shown incommonly used in the US. d Using topical therapies combining 5-7Table II. A strong recom-Acneiform eruptions and multiple mechanisms of action, limiting mendation means that themedication-induced acne are systemic antibiotic use, combining work group believes that the not addressed. Diagnosis and systemic antibiotics with benzoyl benefits clearly outweigh treatment of infantile acne, peroxide and other topical therapies, risks and burden (or that the mid-childhood acne in chil.and adjuvant intralesional corticosteroid risks and burden clearlydren under the age of 9 years, injections are recommended as good outweigh the benefits), andand acne-induced hyperpig.clinical practices. a conditional recommenda.beyond of the scope of these tion means that the work guidelines.4 group believes that the ben.efits are closely balanced with risks and burden. A METHODS conditional recommendation implies that we believe The American Academy of Dermatology (AAD) most people would want the recommended course and Evidinno, Inc., conducted a series of focused and of action. systematic reviews from May 2021 to November 2022 (see Detailed Methods in Supplementary Materials, DEFINITION available via Mendeley at https://data.mendeley. Acne vulgaris is a chronic, inﬂammatory skin com/datasets/z2bmdwwdf9/2) to determine the disease of the pilosebaceous unit.8 Acne primarily effectiveness and safety of treatments currently avail-presents with open or closed comedones, papules, able and approved in the US for the management of pustules, or nodules on the face or trunk and may acne vulgaris in adults, adolescents, and preadoles-result in pain, erythema, hyperpigmentation, or cents aged 9 years or older based on the 9 clinical 8 mentation and scarring are scars. INTRODUCTION/BACKGROUND Acne vulgaris is a common skin condition affecting 9.4% of the global population in 2010, representing the eighth most prevalent disease globally.9 Acne affects approximately 85% of teenagers but can occur in most age groups and can persist into adulthood.10 The burden of acne, as measured by disability-adjusted life years, ranked second among all skin diseases in 2013.11 Over 50 million people in the US have acne.12 In the US, more than 5.1 million Americans sought medical treatment for acne, leading to $846 million in medical costs and $398 million in lost productivity for patients and caregivers in 2013.1 Acne has important impact on emotional functioning, social functioning, relationships, leisure activities, daily activities, sleep, school, and work.13,14 The health-related quality of life impact of acne is comparable to that of chronic conditions such as asthma, psoriasis, and arthritis.15,16 Acne is associated with increased risks of stigmatization, bullying, depression, anxiety, poor self-esteem, and suicidal ideation.17-20 Multifactorial pathogenesis of acne involves follicular hyperkeratinization, microbial colonization with Cutibacterium acnes, sebum production, complex inflammatory mechanisms involving both innate and acquired immunity, neuroendocrine mech.anisms, and genetic and nongenetic factors. Risk factors for acne development include increasing age during adolescence, family history of acne, and oily skin type.21 ACNE GRADING AND CLASSIFICATION Numerous acne clinical grading and classiﬁcation systems have been used in research and clinical settings to assess overall acne disease severity, lesion number and morphologies, affected anatomic sites, and associ.ated secondary changes such as dyspigmentation and scarring. Consistent use of an acne grading and classiﬁcation system may help facilitate therapeutic decision-making and assess treatment response in clinical practice.22 Available grading systems include the Investigator Global Assessment (IGA), Leeds revised acne grading system, Global Acne Grading System, Global Acne Severity Scale, and Comprehensive Acne Severity Scale, among others.23-29 While there is no universally accepted acne grading system in clinical settings, the IGA is most commonly used in the US30 and demonstrates good agreement between clinician and patient ratings. The definition of IGA scales varied over time and will require harmo.nization efforts to facilitate use and future meta.analyses.31 The IGA scale has been used in many randomized controlled trials (RCTs) for acne treat.ments and proposed as a cohesive framework upon which to establish an ideal acne grading system.32 An ideal acne grading system should measure the types of primary acne lesions, number of lesions, and extent and region of skin involvement and should feature strong psychometric properties, ability to categorize severity via descriptive text or photographs, ease of use, and stakeholder acceptance.33 Stakeholders from the International Dermatology Outcomes Measures and the American Academy of Dermatology reached consensus on a 5-point ordinal scale (ranging from 0.4: clear, almost clear, mild, moderate, and severe) to quantify severity of acne and other inflammatory dermatoses in routine clinical practice.34 Descriptors of this scale remain to be standardized and validated for use in facial and truncal acne. Acne severity may also be measured via digital photography, as is increasingly used in clinical practice and trials, as well as fluorescent photography, polarized light photography, video microscopy, and multispectral imaging modalities.35 Beyond signs and symptoms, core acne outcomes measures should also include domains such as satisfaction with appearance, extent of scars/dark marks, satisfaction with treatment received, long-term acne control, adverse events, and health.related quality of life. Acne quality-of-life measures provide a more comprehensive and holistic perspective on the burden of acne on patients’ lives and may not correlate well with clinical acne severity.36 While multiple dermatology-specific and acne-specific health-related quality-of-life measures are available as research tools, shorter measures also exist for use in routine clinical practice.37,38 MICROBIOLOGICAL AND ENDOCRINE TESTING C. acnes (formerly Propionibacterium acnes) is a Gram-positive anaerobic rod primarily implicated in acne pathogenesis, with some strains likely pathogenic while others commensal in the skin Table I. Clinical questions and scope Clinical questions CQ 1. What systems are most commonly used for the grading and classification of acne vulgaris in adults, adolescents, and preadolescents ($9 y)? CQ 2. What is the role of microbiological and endocrine testing in evaluating acne vulgaris in adults, adolescents, and preadolescents ($9 y)? CQ 3. What are the effectiveness and safety of topical agents in the treatment of acne vulgaris in adults, adolescents, and preadolescents ($9 y), including: d Retinoids (adapalene, tazarotene, tretinoin, and trifarotene) d Benzoyl peroxide d Topical antibiotics (erythromycin, clindamycin, dapsone, and minocycline) d Alpha hydroxy acid (glycolic acid) d Beta hydroxy acid (salicylic acid) d Azelaic acid d Topical antiandrogen (clascoterone) d Others (sulfur/sulfacetamide sodium and resorcinol) d Combinations of topical agents CQ 4. What are the effectiveness and safety of systemic antibiotics in the treatment of acne vulgaris in adults, adolescents, and preadolescents ($9 y), including: d Tetracyclines (doxycycline, minocycline, sarecycline) d Macrolides (azithromycin, clarithromycin, and erythromycin) d Penicillins (amoxicillin and ampicillin) d Cephalosporin (cephalexin) d Trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole d Other (dapsone) CQ 5.a. What are the effectiveness and safety of hormonal agents in the treatment of acne vulgaris in adults, adolescents, and preadolescents ($9 y), including: d Combined contraceptive agents (estrogen and progestin) d Aldosterone receptor antagonist (spironolactone) d Oral corticosteroids (prednisolone and prednisone) d Intralesional corticosteroid (triamcinolone) CQ 5.b. For patients on spironolactone, how often and for how long should potassium level be monitored? CQ 6.a. What are the effectiveness and safety of isotretinoin in the treatment of acne vulgaris in adults, adolescents, and preadolescents ($9 y)? CQ 6.b. For patients on isotretinoin, how often and for how long should lipids, liver enzymes, creatine kinase, and blood count levels be monitored? CQ 7. What are the effectiveness and safety of physical modalities for the treatment of acne vulgaris in adults, adolescents, and preadolescents ($9 y), including: d Chemical peels (alpha hydroxy acid: glycolic acid, lactic acid, madelic acid; beta hydroxy acid: salicylic acid) d Comedo extraction d Lasers d Photodynamic/light therapy (blue light therapy, red light therapy, ALA, and IPL) CQ 8. What are the effectiveness and safety of complementary/alternative therapies in the treatment of acne vulgaris in adults, adolescents, and preadolescents ($9 y), including: d Botanicals/plant-derived agents (tea tree oil, green tea, and witch hazel) d Vitamin oral formulation (zinc, niacinamide, pantothenic acid) d Vitamin topical formulation (zinc and niacinamide) CQ 9. What are the effectiveness and safety of diet in the treatment of acne vulgaris in adults, adolescents, and preadolescents ($9 y), including: d Low-glycemic diet d Low-dairy diet d Low-whey diet d Omega-3 and chocolate ALA, Aminolevulinic acid; IPL, intense pulsed light; US, United States. microbiome.39,40 C. acnes has specific culture Staphylococcus aureus, and Malassezia species requirements that prevent growth in routine have also been identified in acne lesions, although bacterial culture. Staphylococcus epidermidis, causal relationships remain to be demonstrated.41-45 Table II. Strength of recommendation and certainty of evidence Strength of recommendation Wording Implication5-7 Strong recommendation ‘‘We recommend.’’ Benefits clearly outweigh risk and burdens; recommendation for the use of an applies to most patients in most circumstances. intervention Strong recommendation ‘‘We recommend against.’’ Risk and burden clearly outweigh benefits; recommendation against the use of an applies to most patients in most circumstances. intervention Good practice statement ‘‘We recommend.’’ Guidance was viewed by the Work Group as imperative to clinical practice and developed when the supporting evidence was considerable but indirect, and the certainty surrounding an intervention’s impact was high with the benefits clearly outweighing the harms (or vice versa). Good Practice Statements are strong recommendations as the certainty surrounding the impact of the recommended intervention is high. Implementation of these strong recommendations is considered to clearly result in 7beneficial outcomes. Conditional ‘‘We conditionally recommend.’’ Benefits are closely balanced with risks and burden; recommendation recommendation applies to most patients, but the most for the use of an appropriate action may differ depending on the patient or intervention other stakeholder values. Conditional ‘‘We conditionally recommend Risks and burden closely balanced with benefits; recommendation against.’’ recommendation applies to most patients, but the most against the use of an appropriate action may differ depending on the patient or intervention other stakeholder values Certainty of evidence Wording Implication5,6 High ‘‘high certainty evidence’’ Very confident that the true effect lies close to that of the estimate of the effect. Moderate ‘‘moderate certainty evidence’’ Moderately confident in the effect estimate; the true effect is likely to be close to the estimate of the effect, but there is a possibility that it is substantially different. Low ‘‘low certainty evidence’’ Confidence in the effect estimate is limited; the true effect may be substantially different from the estimate of the effect Very low "very low certainty evidence" The estimate of effect is very uncertain; the true effect may be substantially different from the estimate of effect While some C. acnes species have developed resistance to antibiotics46,47 and certain strains are more strongly associated with acne, routine microbiologic and/or antibiotic susceptibility testing is not indicated for patients with acne since it does not affect management. Patients presenting with eruptive uniform pustules to nodules in periorificial areas, particularly in settings of prolonged tetracycline treatment, may benefit from lesion culture to diagnose Gram-negative folliculitis. Treatment with isotretinoin or another antibiotic may be required. Microbiologic testing may also be considered for patients presenting with monomorphic truncal papules and pustules to diagnose pityrosporum folliculitis. Androgens, such as testosterone and dehydroepi.androsterone sulfate, have central roles in the pathogenesis of acne. The association between acne severity and androgen levels remains unclear, with some studies showing positive associations while others showed no associations.48,49 Routine endocrinologic testing is not indicated for most patients with acne. Patients who present with acne and clinical signs or symptoms of hyper.androgenism, such as hirsutism, oligomenorrhea or amenorrhea, androgenic alopecia, infertility, polycystic ovaries, clitoromegaly, and truncal obesity may warrant further endocrine testing for hyperandrogenism. Polycystic ovarian syndrome is a common cause of hyperandrogenism, characterized by ovulatory dysfunction or polycystic ovaries on ultrasonography. Tests for serum total and/or free testosterone, dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate, androstenedione, luteinizing hormone, follicle.stimulating hormone may be considered.50-54 For women with hyperandrogenism, screening for Fig 1. Management of acne vulgaris. nonclassic congenital adrenal hyperplasia due to 21.hydroxylase deficiency by 17-hydroxyprogesterone levels may be indicated.50 Serum growth hormone, insulin-like growth factor, sex hormone-binding glob.ulin, free androgen index, lipid panel, insulin, pro.lactin, estrogen, and progesterone may also be 51,54-57 abnormal in some patients with severe acne. Patients with abnormal endocrine testing or in whom there is a persistent concern for underlying endocrine disorder should be evaluated by an endocrinologist. ACNE MANAGEMENT Treatment options available for acne include topical therapies (available over the counter or as prescriptions), systemic antibiotics, hormonal agents, oral isotretinoin, physical modalities, Table III. Recommendation for the management of acne vulgaris in adults, adolescents, and preadolescents ($9 years) No. Recommendation Strength Certainty of evidence Evidence Topical agents 1.1 When managing acne with topical medications, we recommend multimodal therapy combining multiple mechanisms of action. 1.2 For patients with acne, we recommend benzoyl peroxide. 1.3 For patients with acne, we recommend topical retinoids. 1.4 For patients with acne, we recommend topical antibiotics Remark: Topical antibiotic monotherapy is not recommended. 1.5 For patients with acne, we conditionally recommend clascoterone. 1.6 For patients with acne, we conditionally recommend salicylic acid. 1.7 For patients with acne, we conditionally recommend azelaic acid. 1.8 For patients with acne, we recommend fixed dose combination topical antibiotic with benzoyl peroxide 1.9 For patients with acne, we recommend fixed dose combination topical retinoid with topical antibiotic. Remark: Concomitant use of benzoyl peroxide is recommended to prevent the development of antibiotic resistance. 1.10 For patients with acne, we recommend fixed dose combination topical retinoid with benzoyl peroxide. Systemic antibiotics 2.1 For patients with acne, we recommend doxycycline. 2.2 For patients with acne, we conditionally recommend minocycline. 2.3 For patients with acne, we conditionally recommend sarecycline. 2.4 For patients with acne, we conditionally recommend doxycycline over azithromycin. 2.5 For patients with acne, we recommend limiting use of systemic antibiotics when possible to reduce the development of antibiotic resistance and other antibiotic associated complications. 2.6 It is recommended that systemic antibiotics are used concomitantly with benzoyl peroxide and other topical therapy. Hormonal agents 3.1 For patients with acne, we conditionally recommend combined oral contraceptive pills. 3.2 For patients with acne, we conditionally recommend spironolactone. Remark: Potassium monitoring is not needed in healthy patients. However, consider potassium testing for those with risk factors for hyperkalemia (e.g., older age, medical comorbidities, medications). 3.3 For patients with larger acne papules or nodules, we recommend intralesional corticosteroid injections as an adjuvant therapy. Remark: Intralesional corticosteroid injections should be used judiciously for patients who are at risk of acne scarring and/ or for rapid improvement in inflammation and pain. Using a lower concentration and volume of corticosteroid can minimize the risks of local corticosteroid adverse events. Strong Strong Strong Conditional* Conditional Conditional Strong Strong Strong Strong Conditional Conditional* Conditional Conditionaly Conditional Good practice statement 63-70 Moderate 59,60,62-64,71-83Moderate 66,68,69,71,79,84-92Moderate 93,94High 95Low 96-98 Moderate 66,68,69,99-106Moderate 71,79,99,107,108Moderate 63,64,99,109-113Moderate 114-118Moderate 114,119-122Moderate 123-125High 126-129Low Good practice statement Good practice statement 130-139Moderate 140-147Moderate Good practice statement Continued Table III. Cont’d No. Recommendation Strength Certainty of evidence Evidence Isotretinoin 4.1 For patients with severe acne or for patients who have failed Good practice statement standard treatment with oral or topical therapy, we recommend isotretinoin. Remark: Acne patients with psychosocial burden or scarring should be considered as having severe acne and to be candidates for isotretinoin. For patients undergoing treatment with isotretinoin, monitoring of LFTs and lipids should be considered, but CBC monitoring is not needed in healthy patients. Population-based studies have not identified increased risk of neuropsychiatric conditions or inflammatory bowel disease in acne patients undergoing treatment with isotretinoin. For persons of childbearing potential, pregnancy prevention is mandatory. 148-1504.2 For patients with severe acne, we conditionally recommend Conditional Low traditional daily dosing of isotretinoin over intermittent dosing of isotretinoin. 4.3 For patients prescribed isotretinoin, we conditionally Conditional High 151 recommend either standard isotretinoin or lidose.isotretinoin. Physical modalities 5.1 For patients with acne, we conditionally recommend against Conditional Low 152 adding pneumatic broadband light to adapalene 0.3% gel. *Conditional recommendations were made for clascoterone and sarecycline due to high current cost of treatment that may impact equitable acne treatment access. yConditional recommendation was made for combined oral contraceptive pills due to the variability in patient values and preferences related to contraception and hormonal medications. complementary and alternative medicine, and dietary and environmental interventions. Given the diversity of treatment options for acne, shared decision-making is important to individualize acne care based on the potential treatment beneﬁts and risks, the severity, extent, and region of acne involvement, treatment costs, patient preferences, and other factors (Fig 1). TOPICAL THERAPIES Topical therapies are the mainstay of acne treatment: they may be used for acne initial treatment and maintenance as monotherapy (except topical antibiotics) or used in combination with other topical or oral agents. Commonly used topical therapies include topical retinoids, benzoyl peroxide (BP), antibiotics, clascoterone, salicylic acid, and azelaic acid. When managing acne with topical therapies, multimodal therapy combining multiple mecha.nisms of actions is recommended as a good practice statement to optimize efﬁcacy and to reduce the risk of antibiotic resistance. Topical retinoids Topical retinoids are vitamin A derivatives and serve as the cornerstone of acne treatment since they are comedolytic and anti-inﬂammatory, improve dyspigmentation, and enable maintenance of acne clearance. Four types of topical retinoids, including 60,61topical tretinoin,58 adapalene,59 tazarotene, and trifarotene,62 are FDA-approved for acne treatment in the US. Each retinoid binds to a different set of retinoic acid receptors and confers modest differences in activity, tolerability and efficacy. We recommend topical retinoids for acne treatment based on moderate certainty evidence from 20 studies (Table III and Supplementary Table XII, available via Mendeley at https://data.mendeley.com/datasets/ z2bmdwwdf9/2).59,62-64,71-81,153-155 Compared to vehicle at 12 weeks, a greater proportion of patients treated with topical retinoids achieved IGA success in 4 RCTs (risk ratio [RR], 1.57 [1.21, 2.04]).59,63,64,71 Topical retinoid use may be limited by side effects, including increased risk of burning sensation, dryness, erythema, exfoliation, peeling, and pain. Treatment.emergent adverse events leading to discontinuation at 12 weeks were low (1.4%) in 3 RCTs.63,80,155 Existing comparative effectiveness data do not suggest superi.ority of one topical retinoid against another, with efficacy and tolerability differing by specific concen.trations and formulations.153,156-159 Irritation may be particularly common at higher concentrations, which may be mitigated by reduced frequency of use and 160-163 concurrent emollients use. Some tretinoin for.mulations should be applied in the evening due to its photolabile nature and should not be applied with BP to avoid oxidation and inactivation; topical tretinoin microsphere formulations, adapalene, and tazarotene lack similar restrictions. Topical retinoids may cause photosensitivity; concurrent daily sunscreen use can reduce sunburn risks. Adapalene 0.1% gel is available over the counter while other topical retinoids are available by prescription only. Benzoyl peroxide BP is an over-the-counter topical antimicrobial agent that releases free oxygen radicals and is mildly comedolytic.164,165 We recommend BP for acne treatment based on moderate certainty evidence from 8 studies (Table III and Supplementary Table XIII, available via Mendeley at https://data.mendeley. com/datasets/z2bmdwwdf9/2).63-70 Compared to vehicle at 12 weeks, a greater proportion of patients treated with BP achieved IGA success in 3 RCTs (RR, 2.70 [1.10, 6.65]).63-65 Greater reductions in both inflammatory (mean difference [MD] in the percent.age change from baseline, 22.13% [ 42.53%, 1.72%]) and noninflammatory (MD, 17.05% [ 22.96%, 11.14%]) lesion counts were seen in BP versus vehicle at 12 weeks in 3 RCTs.63,66,69 BP use is limited by concentration and formulation-dependent burning sensation, stinging, dryness, erythema, pain, peeling, irritation, fabric staining and bleaching, and uncommon contact allergy. Lower BP concentrations and water-based and wash-off formulations may be better tolerated.166,167 No C. acnes resistance to BP has been reported. Topical antibiotics Topical antibiotics (including erythromycin, clindamycin, minocycline, and dapsone) treat acne through both antibacterial and anti-inﬂammatory effects.168 We recommend topical antibiotics for acne treatment based on moderate certainty evidence from 14 studies (Table III and Supplementary Table XIV, available via Mendeley at https://data.mendeley.com/datasets/z2bmdwwdf 9/2).66,68,69,71,79,84-91 Compared to vehicle at 12 weeks, a greater proportion of patients treated with topical antibiotics achieved IGA success in 3 RCTs (RR, 1.49 [1.28, 1.73]).71,86,87 A greater reduction in inﬂammatory lesions was seen with topical antibiotics versus vehicle at 12 weeks in 8 RCTs (MD in the percentage change from baseline, 10.86% [ 18.81%, 2.91%]),66,69,79,84-87,91 but the difference in reduction in noninflammatory lesion counts between the groups was not statistically significant at 12 weeks in 7 RCT ( 3.33% [ 7.90%, 1.24%]).66,69,79,84-87 Notably, topical anti.biotic monotherapy is not recommended due to concern for antibiotic resistance. Combining topical antibiotics with BP enhances efficacy and may prevent antibiotic resistance development. Concurrent topical application of BP with either dapsone or sulfaceta.mide causes an orange-brown skin discoloration, which can be washed off; thus BP should be used at a different time of day than topical dapsone.169 Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase screening is not required prior to starting topical dapsone. Topical antibiotics are generally well tolerated; there have been rare case reports describing diarrhea or Clostridium difficile-related colitis associated with 92,170 topical clindamycin use. There is a lack of active comparator studies to suggest if any one topical antibiotic is superior to another. Fixed-dose topical combinations Fixed-dose topical combinations of BP, retinoids, or antibiotics facilitate treatment regimen adherence.171 We recommend fixed-dose topical combinations of BP and topical retinoid, BP and topical antibiotic, and topical retinoid and topical antibiotic for acne treatment based on moderate certainty evidence from 763,64,99,109-112 966,68,69,99-104 371,79,99 , and studies, respectively (Table III and Supplementary Tables XV-XXIII, available via Mendeley at https://data. mendeley.com/datasets/z2bmdwwdf9/2). Compared to vehicle at 12 weeks, a greater proportion of patients treated with combined BP and topical retinoid achieved IGA success in 3 RCTs (RR, 2.19 [1.77, 2.72]).63,64,109 Greater reductions in both inflammatory (MD in the percentage change from baseline, 37.34% [ 72.49%, 2.18%]) and noninflammatory (MD, 20.47% [ 26.31, 14.62]) lesion counts were seen in combined BP and topical antibiotic versus vehicle at 12 weeks in 4 RCTs.66,69,99,101 Concomitant BP use is recommended with combined topical retinoid and topical antibiotic to prevent the develop.ment of antibiotic resistance. Potential adverse effect profiles of the fixed-dose combinations generally reflect those of the individual agents in summation. Some fixed-dose combination products may be less .expensive than prescribing their individual components separately. Clascoterone Clascoterone is a topical antiandrogen that directly binds the androgen receptor and inhibits androgen-mediated lipid and inﬂammatory cytokine synthesis from sebocytes.172 We conditionally recommend clascoterone for acne treatment based on high certainty evidence from 2 studies (Table III and Supplementary Table XXIV, available via Mendeley at https://data.mendeley.com/datasets/ z2bmdwwdf9/2) and based on work group discussions related to treatment access and cost. Compared to vehicle at 12 weeks, a greater proportion of patients treated with clascoterone achieved IGA success in 2 RCTs (RR, 2.08 [1.39, 3.11]).93 Despite high certainty of benefits over risks based on clinical trial evidence, the work group voted on a conditional recommendation due to concerns about the high current cost of clascoterone treatment that may impact equitable acne treatment access. This conditional recommen.dation may be revised in the future pending changes in treatment cost and access. Salicylic acid Salicylic acid is a topical comedolytic agent that is available over the counter, with concentration ranging in 0.5% to 2%. We conditionally recommend salicylic acid for acne treatment based on moderate certainty evidence from 1 RCT, showing a 25% greater reduction in inﬂammatory lesions, 11% greater reduction in open comedones, and no difference in closed comedones with 0.5% salicylic acid use compared to vehicle at 12 weeks (Table III and Supplementary Table XXV, available via Mendeley at https://data.mendeley.com/datasets/ z2bmdwwdf9/2).95 Chemical peels using salicylic acid 10% to 30% are separately discussed in the physical modalities section. Azelaic acid Azelaic acid is a topical comedolytic, antibacterial, and anti-inﬂammatory agent, which may be particularly helpful for patients with sensitive skin or darker skin types due to its lightening effect on dyspigmentation.96,97,173 We conditionally recom.mend topical azelaic acid for acne treatment based on moderate certainty evidence from 3 RCTs (Table III and Supplementary Table XXVI, available via Mendeley at https://data.mendeley.com/ datasets/z2bmdwwdf9/2).96-98 In 1 RCT of 92 pa.tients, 28% more patients receiving azelaic acid 20% cream twice daily achieved 50% to 100% reduction in total lesion count compared to vehicle at 3 months.97 Considerations in topical therapies In patients who are pregnant, the risk of fetal harm from topical azelaic acid, BP, erythromycin, and clindamycin are not expected based on limited expected systemic absorption.174,175 Salicylic acid can be used in pregnancy if the area of exposure and duration of therapy is limited; use for large areas or under occlusion are not recommended due to the potential for systemic absorption.174 There are no data on the safety of topical dapsone and clascoterone during pregnancy or lactation. Tazarotene is contraindicated in pregnancy based on animal reproduction studies, retinoid pharma.cology, and the potential for systemic absorption. No human studies have established causal relationships between the use of topical retinoids with birth defects; nevertheless, topical therapies other than topical retinoids are preferred during pregnancy. Topical minocycline is not recommended during pregnancy or lactation. Salicylic acid is available over the counter. Fixed.dose combination BP 2.5%/adapalene 1% gel, tretinoin 0.1%/BP 3% cream, tretinoin 0.05% lotion, trifarotene 0.005% cream, dapsone 5% gel, and minocycline 4% foam are FDA-approved for ages 9 years and above, and most other topical retinoids, antibiotics, clascoterone, and azelaic acid are approved for age 12 years and above. Available evidence is insufﬁcient to develop a recommendation on the use of topical glycolic acid, sulfur, sodium sulfacetamide, and resorcinol for acne treatment or to make recommendations that compare topical BP, retinoids, antibiotics, and their combinations directly against each other (Supplementary Tables XXVII-XXXV, available via Mendeley at https://data.mendeley.com/datasets/ z2bmdwwdf9/2). SYSTEMIC ANTIBIOTICS Systemic antibiotics have been used extensively to treat acne, typically moderate to severe acne. Oral tetracycline-class antibiotics, including doxycycline, minocycline, and sarecycline, are commonly used. Tetracycline-class antibiotics exhibit antibiotic properties by binding the 16S ribosomal RNA of the bacterial ribosome 30S subunit to inhibit protein synthesis, as well as anti-inﬂammatory properties by inhibiting neutrophil chemotaxis and matrix metalloproteinases and down-regulating inﬂamma.tory cytokines.176 Notably, tetracycline-class antibi.otics are contraindicated in pregnancy, lactation, and childhood below age 9 years during tooth develop.ment, since repeated exposure may cause perma.nent teeth enamel hypoplasia or discoloration. Limiting the use of systemic antibiotics when possible is recommended as a good practice statement to reduce the development of antibiotic resistance and other antibiotic-associated complications. In 2021, dermatologists prescribed more oral antibi.otics per clinician than all other specialties, with the 177,178majority of antibiotics used for acne treatment. In addition to concerns about antibiotic resistance, oral tetracycline-class antibiotic use has been asso.ciated with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD),114 pharyngitis,179 Clostridium difficile infection,180,181 and Candida vulvovaginitis. Outpatient antibiotic stewardship promotes appropriate antibiotic use in which patients receive the right dose of the right antibiotic at the right time for the right duration. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recom.mend outpatient antibiotic stewardship programs to include (1) commitment to optimizing antibiotic prescribing and patient safety, (2) implementation action for stewardship policy or practice, (3) tracking prescribing practices through clinician feedback or self-assessment, and (4) access to educational re.sources and expertise.182 When treating acne with systemic antibiotics, we recommend concomitant use of BP and other topical therapies as a good practice statement to decrease risk of antibiotic resistance and to limit the duration of systemic antibiotic exposure. Oral antibiotics should not be used as monotherapy for acne treatment. Systemic antibiotic use should also be limited to the shortest duration possible, typically no more than 3-4 months, as recommended by international guidelines.3,183,184 For patients who have inadequate response or contraindications to nonantibiotic therapies and may require longer courses of systemic antibiotics, consistent follow up and re-evaluation should limit systemic antibiotic use to the shortest duration and should maintain treatment endpoints with concur.rent topical therapies during and after systemic 185-189antibiotic treatment. Doxycycline We recommend doxycycline for acne treatment based on moderate certainty evidence from 5 studies (Table III and Supplementary Table XXXVI, available via Mendeley at https://data.mendeley.com/datasets/ z2bmdwwdf9/2).114-118 Compared to vehicle at 4 months, a greater proportion of patients treated with doxycycline achieved IGA success in 2 RCTs (RR, 1.80 [1.17, 2.77]).116,117 Treatment withdrawal due to adverse effects was more common with doxycycline compared to placebo in 3 trials (1.3% vs 0.3%; RR, 2.25 [0.38, 13.21]).115-117 Doxycycline may cause gastroin.testinal disturbances (15.7% vs 5.9%; RR, 2.56 [1.05, 6.25]),115-117 including nausea, vomiting, and diar.rhea; esophagitis, phototoxicity; and rarely intracra.nial hypertension. Taking doxycycline with food and adequate fluids in the upright position may reduce gastrointestinal side effects. Low-dose doxycycline (20 mg twice daily or 40 mg extended release daily) has demonstrated efficacy in patients with moderate inflammatory acne, 115 but there remains insufficient evidence comparing oral doxycycline at different dosages directly.190 We conditionally recommend doxycycline over azithromycin for acne treatment based on low certainty evidence from 4 studies (Table III and Supplementary Table XXXVII, available via Mendeley at https://data.mendeley.com/datasets/ z2bmdwwdf9/2).126-129 A greater reduction in total lesion counts was seen in doxycycline versus azithromycin at 12 weeks (MD in the change from baseline, 6.0 [-11.63, 0.37] in 1 RCT.126 Azithromycin is a broad-spectrum macrolide anti.biotic that covers respiratory and other infections; increasing azithromycin use could increase antibiotic resistance. Minocycline We conditionally recommend minocycline for acne treatment based on moderate certainty evidence from 5 studies and based on work group discussions related to uncommon potential treatment adverse effects (Table III and Supplementary Table XXXVIII, available via Mendeley at https://data.mendeley.com/datasets/ z2bmdwwdf9/2).114,119-122 Compared to vehicle at 12 weeks, a greater proportion of patients treated with minocycline achieved IGA success in 2 RCTs (RR, 1.82 [1.28, 2.57]).119-121 Adverse effects requiring treatment cessation were higher with minocycline compared to placebo in 2 RCTs (9.1% vs 1.0%; RR, 6.23 [1.20, 32.99]).120,122 Oral minocycline confers similar common adverse effects as doxycycline. Despite moderate certainty of benefits over risks based on clinical trial evidence, the work group voted on a conditional recommendation due to concerns about rare potential adverse effects of minocycline, which include vertigo, autoimmune hepatitis, skin hyperpigmentation, drug-induced lupus, and hypersensitivity syndrome. As there is insufficient evidence comparing doxycycline and minocycline directly, the potential risks and benefits of each treatment option should be considered (Supplementary Table XXXIX, available via Mendeley at https://data.mendeley.com/datasets/ z2bmdwwdf9/2). Moreover, oral minocycline mono.therapy is not superior to topical BP 5% or erythro.mycin 2%/BP 5% in mild to moderate acne in 1 RCT (Supplementary Tables XL-XLII, available via Mendeley at https://data.mendeley.com/datasets/ z2bmdwwdf9/2).191 Available evidence is insufficient to develop a recommendation on the use of long-term minocycline monotherapy or in combination with tazarotene asmaintenance therapy beyond3-4 months over tazarotene gel alone (Supplementary Table XLIII, available via Mendeley at https://data.mendeley.com/ datasets/z2bmdwwdf9/2).186 Sarecycline We conditionally recommend sarecycline for acne treatment based on high certainty evidence from 3 studies and based on Work Group discussions related to treatment access and cost (Table III and Supplementary Table XLIV, available via Mendeley at https://data.mendeley.com/datasets/z2bmdwwdf 9/2).123-125 Sarecycline is a narrow-spectrum tetracycline-class antibiotic, and compared to vehicle at 12 weeks, a greater proportion of patients treated with sarecycline achieved IGA success in 2 RCTs (22.3% vs 13.0%; RR, 1.73 [1.23, 2.44]).123-125 Sarecycline is dosed by weight at 1.5 mg/kg and is generally well tolerated with low incidence of gastro.intestinal, photosensitivity, and Candida infection side effects. Despite high certainty of benefits over risks based on clinical trial evidence, the work group voted on a conditional recommendation due to concerns about the high current cost of sarecycline treatment that may impact equitable acne treatment access. This conditional recommendation may be revised in the future pending changes in treatment cost and access. Considerations in systemic antibiotics Oral doxycycline, minocycline, and sarecycline are FDA-approved for the management of acne. In patients who are pregnant or lactating, tetracycline.class antibiotics should be avoided due to potential for permanent teeth discoloration and bone growth inhibition in the fetus or nursing infant. The 2016 AAD acne guidelines discussed the limited use of oral erythromycin and azithromycin for pregnant persons and on the restricted use of trimethoprim.sulfamethoxazole or trimethoprim for patients unable to tolerate tetracyclines.3 Available evidence is insuf.ficienttodevelop a recommendationonthe use of oral azithromycin or trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole for acne treatment (Supplementary Tables XLV.XLVIII, available via Mendeley at https://data. mendeley.com/datasets/z2bmdwwdf9/2). In addi.tion, TMP-SMX may be associated with severe adverse reactions such as Stevens-Johnson syndrome/toxic epidermal necrolysis and acute respiratory failure. These antibiotics are also indicated for community.acquired infections, such as pneumonia and urinary tract infections, and broad use for acne should be discouraged to avoid selection of antibiotic-resistant bacteria. Available evidence is also insufficient to make recommendations that compare systemic antibiotics directly against each other or against topical therapies (Supplementary Tables XLIX-LIII, available via Mendeley at https://data.mendeley.com/ datasets/z2bmdwwdf9/2). HORMONAL AGENTS Combined oral contraceptives Combined oral contraceptives (COCs) contain combinations of estrogen and progestin. COC prevent ovulation and pregnancy by inhibiting gonadotropin-releasing hormone, follicle stimulating hormone, and luteinizing hormone. COC treat acne through their overall anti-androgenic properties, which decrease ovarian androgen production, in.crease sex hormone-binding globulin, and reduce free testosterone that would otherwise activate the androgen receptor. COC reduce 5a-reductase activity 192-195 and block the androgen receptor. Ethinyl estradiol (EE) is the most common estrogen component in COC, with daily doses typically ranging from 10-50 g. Progestins are synthesized progester.one analogues and are historically categorized by generations. First, second, and third generation pro.gestins are derived from testosterone and have androgenic potential if used alone. Examples of first-generation oral progestins include norethin.drone and ethynodiol diacetate; second-generation include levonorgestrel and norgestrel; and third.generation include norgestimate and desogestrel, which are considered less androgenic than prior generations. Progestin-only oral contraceptive pills, intramuscular injections, intrauterine devices, or sub.196,197 cutaneous implants may worsen acne. Fourth.generation progestins include oral drospirenone and dienogest. Drospirenone is a spironolactone analogue not derived from testosterone and has antiandrogenic properties. Combined with estrogen, all COCs yield net antiandrogenic properties.193,198 Four COCs are FDA-approved for treatment of acne in women who desire oral contraception, including norgestimate/EE, norethindrone acetate/EE/ferrous fumarate, drospirenone/EE, and drospirenone/EE/ levomefolate. All COCs are currently available in generic forms in the US. We conditionally recommend COCs for acne treat.ment based on moderate certainty evidence from 10 studies130-139 and variability in patient values and preferences related to contraception (Table III and Supplementary Table LIV, available via Mendeley at https://data.mendeley.com/datasets/z2bmdwwdf 9/2). Data on all COC formulations with acne out.comes, regardless of specific approved indication for acne treatment, were pooled and compared against placebo. Compared to vehicle at the end of cycle 6, a greater proportion of patients treated with COCs achieved IGA success in 3 RCTs (RR, 1.45 [1.06, 1.97]).130-132 Greater reductions in both inflammatory (MD in the percentage change from baseline, 15.81% [ 20.44%, 11.17%]) and noninflammatory (MD, 19.45% [ 9.9, 9.0]) lesion counts were seen in COC versus vehicle at the end of cycle 6 in 9 RCTs130-138 and 6 RCTs,131-134,136,137 respectively. High dropout rates of 25% to 35% across multiple RCTs may in part reflect variability in patient preferences regarding COC continuation. Current data show no consistent difference in acne responses based on COC formulations or dosages and do not support the superiority of one COC over another for acne treat.ment (Supplementary Tables LVI-LXI, available via Mendeley at https://data.mendeley.com/datasets/ z2bmdwwdf9/2).199-205 Reports of any adverse effects (54.0% vs 50.1%; RR, 1.15 [1.07, 1.24]) and treatment withdrawal due to adverse effects (5.1% vs 2.9%; 1.86 [1.32, 2.62]) are more common with COCs than with placebo. COC for acne treatment is not limited to patients with acne affecting the jawline or with premenstrual flares, hirsutism, or hyperandrogenism. Clinicians should counsel patients about expected time to acne improvement with COCs, usually notable within 3-6 months, and may consider combining COCs with other acne therapies early in treatment course to accelerate treatment response. Obtaining a comprehensive medical history and measuring blood pressure are important before pre.scribing COCs.206 Clinicians may be reasonably certain that a patient who has no symptoms or signs of pregnancy and who meets specific criteria (eg, who presents within 7 days after the start of normal menses or who have not had sexual intercourse since the start of last normal menses) is not pregnant.207 Urine pregnancy tests may also be considered.207 COC access may be expanded using patient eligibility self-screening tools.208 Pelvic and breast examination, cervical cancer screening, and sexually transmitted infection screening are not required prior to COC initiation.208 Recommendations for contraceptive selection for patients with specific characteristics or medical conditions are found in the US Medical Eligibility Criteria for Contraceptive Use, 2016, which is available as a mobile application to facilitate use in clinical settings.209 Absolute and relative contraindications to COCs are summarized in Table IV.209 Discussions weighing potential benefits and risks of COCs may differ depending on its indication: if a COC is indicated to prevent pregnancy, its risks and benefits should be contextualized against those of an unintended pregnancy; if a COC is indicated exclusively for acne treatment, its risks and benefits should be compared against those of acne. Potential adverse effects of COCs include venous thromboembolism (VTE), myocardial infarction, stroke, breast cancer, cervical cancer, among others. Typical use of EE with daily dose below 50 gis associated with lower VTE risks compared to historical use of EE with daily doses above 50 g, which are no longer available in the US; existing data have not shown significant effect of further EE dose reductions below 50 g on VTE risks.208,210 The absolute risk of VTE associated with COC use is small 208,210compared to the risk of VTE in pregnancy. Estimated VTE incidence per 10,000 person-years are estimated at approximately 1-5 in nonpregnant women who do not use COCs, 3-9 in COC users, 10 in drospirenone-containing COC users, 5-20 in pregnancy, and 40-65 in the 12-week postpartum period.208,210 COC use is associated with small increases in myocardial infarction and stroke risks, particularly in patients above age 35 years who smoke tobacco or patients who have hypertension, diabetes mellitus, or migraines. While cardiovascular events are important safety concerns, they are uncommon in reproductive-aged patients, in which a small relative risk increase still represents an overall low absolute risk.193,194,211 COCs have been associated with small increases in breast cancer and cervical cancer risks and decreases in endometrial, ovarian, and colorectal cancer risks in systematic reviews.212-216 A long-term cohort study of 46,022 women in the United Kingdom showed an overall neutral balance between short-and long-term cancer risks and benefits in past COC users after 30 years of follow-up.214 COC confers beneﬁts beyond contraception and acne treatment, including regulating menstrual cy.cles, induction of amenorrhea, prevention of menstrual migraines, and treatment of conditions such as dysmenorrhea, hirsutism, menorrhagia, endometriosis-associated pelvic pain, premenstrual syndrome, among others.217 Due to numerous potential benefits, risks, and variability in patient values and preferences, patient-centered contracep.tive counseling that prioritize patients’ values, preferences, and lived experiences in the shared decision-making of initiation or discontinuation of contraceptive methods is critical.218 To help all patients achieve reproductive goals, the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists recommends intentional application of a reproduc.tive justice framework that acknowledges historical devaluation of reproductive desires of people of color and other marginalized individuals and conscious and unconscious clinician bias in contraceptive counseling.218 COC may be combined with other oral or topical acne medications, including tetracycline antibiotics and spironolactone. Tetracycline-class antibiotics have not been shown to reduce COC Table IV. Summary of contraindications to combined oral contraceptive use based on the US Medical Eligibility Criteria for Contraceptive Use* Absolute contraindications (Category 4: A condition that represents Relative contraindications (Category 3: A condition for which the an unacceptable health risk if COC is used) theoretical or proven risks usually outweigh the benefits of COC) Personal characteristics and reproductive history  d  Age $35 y and smoking $15 cigarettes daily  d  Age $35 y and smoking \15 cigarettes daily  d \21 d postpartum, regardless of breastfeeding status  d  Breastfeeding patient 21-29 d postpartum  d  Breastfeeding patient 30-42 d postpartum, with other VTE  risk factorsy  d  Nonbreastfeeding patient 21-42 d postpartum, with other  VTE risk factorsy  Cardiovascular disease  d  SBP $160 mmHg or DBP $100 mmHg  d  SBP 140-159 mmHg or DBP 90-99 mmHg  d  Vascular disease  d  Adequately controlled hypertension  d  Acute  VTE  or  history  of  VTE  with  $1  risk  factor  for  d  VTE with no risk factors for recurrence  z recurrence  d  Superficial venous thrombosis  d  Major surgery with prolonged immobilization  d  Peripartum  cardiomyopathy  with  normal  or  mildly  d  Known thrombogenic mutationx  impaired cardiac function for $6mo  d  Multiple risk factors for atherosclerosisk  d  Current or history of ischemic heart disease  d  Current or history of stroke  d  Valvular heart disease with complications{  d  Peripartum  cardiomyopathy  with  normal  or  impaired  cardiac  function  for \6  mo  or  moderate  or  severely  impaired cardiac function  Gastrointestinal conditions  d  Acute or flare of viral hepatitis  d  History of malabsorptive procedures (Roux-en-Y gastric  d  Severe or decompensated cirrhosis  bypass or biliopancreatic diversion)  d  Hepatocellular adenoma  d  Ulcerative colitis or Crohn disease with increased VTE risk#  d  Malignant liver tumor (hepatoma)  d  Untreated or medically treated symptomatic gallbladder  disease  d  History of COC-related cholestasis  d Diabetes with nephropathy, retinopathy, neuropathy, other vascular disease, or with duration [ 20 y** d Current breast cancer d Past breast cancer with no evidence of disease for 5 y d Migraine with aura d Multiple sclerosis with prolonged immobility d Systemic lupus erythematosus with positive or unknown antiphospholipid antibodies d Solid organ transplantation complicated by acute or chronic graft failure, rejection, or cardiac allograft vasculopathy BP, Blood pressure; COC, combined oral contraceptives; VTE, venous thromboembolism. *Adapted from Curtis KM et al. Please refer to the US Medical Eligibility Criteria for Contraceptive Use 2016 for additional clarification, evidence, and comments related to important classification details on combined hormonal contraceptives.209 yRisk factors include age $35 years, previous VTE, thrombophilia, immobility, transfusion at delivery, peripartum cardiomyopathy, body mass index $30 kg/m2, postpartum hemorrhage, post-Cesarean delivery, preeclampsia, or smoking. zRisk factors include history of estrogen-related VTE, pregnancy-related VTE, idiopathic VTE, known thrombophilia (including antiphospholipid syndrome), active cancer (metastatic, receiving therapy, or within 6 months after clinical remission) excluding nonmelanoma skin cancer, or history of recurrent VTE. xKnown thrombogenic mutations include factor V Leiden, prothrombin mutation, protein S deficiency, protein C deficiency, or anti-thrombin deficiency. kRisk factors include older age, smoking, diabetes mellitus, hypertension, low high-density lipoprotein, high low-density lipoprotein, or high triglycerides. {Complicated valvular heart disease includes pulmonary hypertension, risk for atrial fibrillation, or history of subacute bacterial endocarditis. #Risk factors include active or extensive disease, surgery, immobilization, corticosteroid use, vitamin deficiencies, or fluid depletion. **Classification as absolute (class 4) or relative (class 3) contraindication is assessed based on severity of diabetes-related complications. effectiveness.194,211,219,220 Among anti-infectives, rifampin and griseofulvin have demonstrably reduced COC effectiveness.221 Concomitant use of spironolactone and drospirenone did not increase serum potassium or adverse effects requiring treat.ment discontinuation.222,223 COC is FDA-approved for female patients above age 14 years (drospire.none/EE, drosperinone/EE/levomefolate) or 15 years (norgestimate/EE, norethindrone/EE/ ferrous fumarate). A new type of COC with drospir.enone/estetrol was approved by the FDA for contra.ception in 2021224; its use for acne was not evaluated in the current guidelines. Spironolactone Spironolactone is an aldosterone receptor antag.onist that decreases testosterone production and competitively inhibits testosterone and dihydrotes.tosterone binding to androgen receptors in the skin.225-228 Spironolactone may also inhibit 5a-reductase and increase steroid-hormone binding globulin.229,230 Spironolactone is not FDA-approved for the treatment of acne. We conditionally recommend spironolactone for acne treatment based on moderate certainty evidence from 8 studies (Table III and Supplementary Table LV, available via Mendeley at https://data.mendeley. com/datasets/z2bmdwwdf9/2).140-147 Compared to placebo combined with BP 2.5% alone at 12 weeks, a greater proportion of patients treated with spirono.lactone 50 mg daily combined with BP 2.5% achieved IGA success in a small RCT of 40 patients (75.0% vs 30.0%; RR, 2.50 [1.22, 5.11]).140 Compared to vehicle at 12 weeks, a greater proportion of patients treated with spironolactone at daily doses ranging from 50.200 mg had improvement in patient global assess.ment in 2 small RCTs of 58 patients (77.4% vs 22.25; RR, 3.60 [1.75, 7.42]).141,142 A cohort study comparing acne patients starting treatment with spironolactone to those starting treatment with oral tetracycline-class antibiotics found similar rates of treatment effective.ness, as assessed by treatment switching, between the 2 groups.231 Menstrual irregularities were commonly reported (40.6% vs 0%; RR, 10.89 [1.54, 77.08]),140,141 may be dose-dependent,232 and are less common among those using COC.233 Common side effects also include diuresis, breast tenderness, breast enlarge.ment, gynecomastia, fatigue, headache, and dizzi.ness. 234 Although spironolactone 50-100 mg/day showed a greater improvement in IGA at 12 weeks as well as acne-specific quality of life and patient global assessment at 24 weeks compared with pla.cebo in a recent RCT of 410 patients,235 it was published after the literature search was finalized for the current guidelines.’’ The work group remarked that potassium moni.toring is of low usefulness without risk factors for hyperkalemia (eg, older age, medical co-morbidities, medications) based on very low certainty observa.tional studies.140-147 No significant changes in serum electrolytes were seen in 2 small RCT of spironolac.140,141 tone for acne treatment. In a large cohort study of 108,547 patients with acne who received spirono.lactone for $30 days, 0.22% received a hyperkalemia diagnosis and 0.03% discontinued spironolactone within 30 days after hyperkalemia diagnosis. A 4.year retrospective cohort study reported 6 cases of hyperkalemia during 291 patient-years of follow-up. A retrospective review of 974 women aged 18-45 years receiving spironolactone 50-200 mg daily for acne showed that 15 (0.8%) of the 1802 associated potassium measurements exceeded 5.0 mmol/L; all patients with hyperkalemia were asymptomatic and continued spironolactone treatment.145 In a cohort study of 139 male and female Japanese patients who received spironolactone for acne, with daily dose taper from 200 mg to 50 mg over 20 weeks, all 25 patients in the subset who received potassium moni.toring had normal potassium levels in 32 weeks of follow-up.146 In a cohort study of 124 healthy women with baseline normal serum potassium level, 3 (2.4%) patients aged 42-47 years had incident hyperkalemia upon follow-up.147 Potassium monitoring should be considered in older patients; patients with medical co.morbidities such as hypertension, diabetes mellitus, chronic kidney disease, among others; and patients taking medications affecting renal, adrenal, and he.patic function, including angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors, angiotensin receptor blockers, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, digoxin, among others. Avoiding a diet high in potassium should be considered.236 Spironolactone should not be used in pregnancy. Spironolactone crosses the placenta and exposure in utero in animal studies may cause feminization of a male fetus. Human data are based on limited case reports, with 5 cases resulting in normal male genital development and 1 case of ambiguous genitalia in a newborn of a mother treated with spironolactone until week 5 of gestation.237 Concurrent COC use is often indicated in treating acne with spironolactone. Spironolactone carries a warning on tumorige.nicity based on chronic toxicity studies in rats that were exposed to up to 150 times human doses of spironolactone or its metabolites. A systematic review of 7 studies of 4.5 million individuals showed no statistically signiﬁcant association between spironolactone use in men and women above age 18 years and risks of breast cancer (RR 1.04; 95% conﬁdence interval 0.86-1.22), ovarian cancer (1.52; 0.84-2.20), bladder cancer (0.89; 0.71-1.07); kidney cancer (0.96; 0.85-1.07), gastric cancer (1.02; 0.80-1.24), or esophageal cancer (1.09; 0.91-1.27) based on low to very low certainty of evidence.238 Spironolactone use is associated with decreased prostate cancer risk (0.79; 0.68-0.90) compared to non-users based on very low certainty of evidence.238 Intralesional corticosteroid Intralesional corticosteroid therapy has been used as an adjuvant therapy for acne. Although there is limited clinical trial data evaluating intralesional corticosteroid injection for acne, in a small RCT of 9 patients, most acne cysts injected with triamcinolone resolved within 3-7 days of the treatment, and those injected with triamcinolone resolved faster than those with saline control.239 In addition, intralesional corticosteroid injections are effective for a variety of other inflammatory skin conditions such as granu.loma annulare, hidradenitis suppurativa, inflamed epidermal cysts, and keloids.240-246 Together, these characteristics indirectly imply that intralesional corticosteroid injection can be a useful treatment option; therefore, the work group issued a good practice statement for intralesional corticosteroid injection use as an adjuvant therapy in patients with larger acne papules or nodules (Table III). Intralesional corticosteroid injections should be used judiciously for patients who are at risk of acne scarring and/or for rapid improvement in inflamma.tion and pain. Localized skin atrophy, systemic absorption of steroids, and possible adrenal suppression may occur. 247 Using a lower concentra.tion and volume of corticosteroid (eg, triamcinolone 2.5-5 mg/ml) can minimize the risks of local corticosteroid adverse events.248 Considerations in hormonal agents Available evidence is insufﬁcient to develop a recommendation on the use of oral corticosteroids, ﬂutamide, or metformin for acne treatment (Supplementary Tables LXII-LXVIII, available via Mendeley at https://data.mendeley.com/datasets/ z2bmdwwdf9/2). The 2016 AAD acne guidelines discussed the temporary use of oral corticosteroids for patients with severe inflammatory acne while starting standard acne treatment and low-dose oral corticosteroids for patients with adrenal hyperan.drogenism.3 Prednisone 0.5-1 mg/kg/day has been used to treat acne fulminans, isotretinoin-induced acne fulminans and to prevent isotretinoin-induced acne flares in at-risk patients.249,250 However, long-term adverse effects of oral corticosteroids prohibit their use as a primary acne treatment. ISOTRETINOIN Oral isotretinoin, or 13-cis-retinoic acid, is the only FDA-approved treatment for severe recalcitrant nodular acne vulgaris since 1982. While the exact mechanism of action is unknown, isotretinoin reduces the size and secretion of sebaceous glands, decreases surface and ductal level of sebum.dependent C. acnes indirectly, inhibits comedogen.esis by normalizing keratinocyte keratinization, and possesses anti-inflammatory properties.251 Despite the remarkable effectiveness of isotreti.noin observed in routine dermatology practice, clinical trial data regarding its efﬁcacy are limited and of low quality. In a RCT of 33 patients with treatment-resistant cystic and conglobate acne, mean number of cystic lesions decreased by 17% and 33% at 1 and 2 months of isotretinoin treatment, but increased by 33% and 58% at 1 and 2 months of placebo (Supplementary Table LXIX, available via Mendeley at https://data.mendeley.com/datasets/ z2bmdwwdf9/2).252 Moreover, 13 of 17 patients receiving placebo switched to isotretinoin due to acne worsening.252 Earlier dose-response studies showed a significant improvement across all dosages (0.1, 0.5, and 1 mg/kg/day).253-255 In a RCT of 925 patients comparing standard isotretinoin with lidose.isotretinoin, 81.0% of patients treated with standard isotretinoin experienced a 90% reduction in lesion count and 88.9% of patients treated with standard isotretinoin achieved treatment success after 20 weeks of treatment.151 In another RCT of 60 patients, the low-dose isotretinoin (5 mg daily) group had fewer total lesions compared to those in the vehicle group after 16 weeks of treatment (MD in total lesion counts, 5.4 [-8.91, 1.89]).256 Many global acne experts have agreed that isotretinoin is the most appropriate treatment option for those with 183,184,257-262 severe or scarring acne. Together, these characteristics indirectly imply the excellent efficacy of isotretinoin; therefore, WG issued a good practice statement for isotretinoin use in patients with severe acne or in patients who have failed standard treatment with oral or topical therapy (Table III). The work group remarked that patients with acne who present with acne-related psychosocial burden and/or scarring should be considered candidates for isotretinoin treatment. Isotretinoin has been extensively used to treat mild to moderate acne that is refractory to other topical and oral therapies or that relapses quickly after discontinuation of oral antibiotics.148-150,263-265 Common adverse effects associated with isotretinoin involve the mucocutaneous, musculoskeletal, and ophthalmic systems and generally resolve following isotretinoin discontinuation with standard treatment courses. 3 Laboratory monitoring during isotretinoin treatment should include liver function tests, fasting lipid panel, and pregnancy test for patients with pregnancy potential and should not include complete blood count monitoring. While signiﬁcant heterogeneity exist among study deﬁnitions, data from 5 isotretinoin cohort studies estimated that risks of abnormal liver function tests above reference limits ranged from 0.8% to 10.4%, with 0.9% to 4.7% requiring treatment discontinuation (Supplementary Table LXX, available via Mendeley at https://data.mendeley.com/datasets/z2bmdwwd f9/2).266-270 Data from 6 isotretinoin cohort studies estimated that the risks of abnormal triglycerides ranged from 7.1% to 39.0% and abnormal cholesterol levels ranged from 6.8% to 27.2% (Supplementary Table LXXI, available via Mendeley at https:// data.mendeley.com/datasets/z2bmdwwdf9/2).266-271 Data from 2 isotretinoin cohort studies estimated the risk of mild normocytic anemia as 0.4%, abnormal platelet level at 1.2% to 2.9%, and abnormal white blood cell count at 7.0% to 10.8% (Supplementary Table LXXII, available via Mendeley at https://data. mendeley.com/datasets/z2bmdwwdf9/2).269,270 No grade 3 or greater abnormalities in the complete blood count was observed.270 Prior meta-analyses of 26 studies showed that the proportion of patients with laboratory abnormalities was low.272 A recent Delphi consensus study of 22 acne experts reached agreement on checking alanine aminotransferase and triglycerides prior to initiation and at peak isotretinoin dose and on not checking complete blood count, low-density lipoprotein or high.density lipoprotein.273 Data on laboratory monitoring in patients treated with isotretinoin have been critically appraised, with little evidence to support the benefit of laboratory monitoring to detect adverse events.274 For persons with pregnancy potential, pregnancy prevention is mandatory with isotretinoin treatment. After introduction of isotretinoin in the US in 1982, there were hundreds of reports of isotretinoin.exposed pregnancies that resulted in fetal congenital malformations.275 iPLEDGE is the current FDA.mandated Risk Evaluation and Mitigation Strategy aimed to prevent isotretinoin exposure in preg.nancy. All patients receiving isotretinoin are required to enroll in and adhere to iPLEDGE. Recent iPLEDGE modification in 2021 categorized patients into 2 gender-neutral categories: patients who cannot become pregnant, per iPLEDGE definition, include a patient who has had a hysterectomy and/or bilateral oophorectomy, a patient who is post.menopausal, or a patient who was born with male reproductive organs. Patients who can become pregnant must adhere to complete abstinence or use 2 specified contraceptive methods at least 1 month before, during, and 1 month after isotreti.noin treatment. Since the iPLEDGE implementation, approximately 150 isotretinoin-exposed pregnan.cies continue to occur in the US annually due to non-adherence with contraceptive require.276,277ments. Among sexually active patients who reported non-adherence, 29% did not comply with consistent condom use and 39% missed 1 or more contraceptive pills in the previous month.277 Patients with pregnancy potential receiving isotretinoin should be carefully counseled regarding various contraceptive methods that are available and the specific requirements of the iPLEDGE system at each clinic visit. Long-acting reversible contraceptives, including intrauterine devices and contraceptive implants, should be considered as the primary con.traceptive method whenever clinically appropriate since they have higher effectiveness than COCs and condoms in reducing the risk of unintended preg.nancy and do not depend on ongoing patient efforts.278 Population-based studies have not identiﬁed increased risk of neuropsychiatric conditions or IBD in patients with acne undergoing isotretinoin treatment (Supplementary Table LXIX, available via Mendeley at https://data.mendeley.com/data sets/z2bmdwwdf9/2). Available low certainty evidence from 7 observational studies with substan.tial heterogeneity do not support a significant association between isotretinoin use and IBD inci.dence, including ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s dis.279-285 ease. The overall RR of IBD between isotretinoin-exposed and unexposed groups is esti.mated at 1.13 (95% confidence interval, 0.89, 1.43).279-285 Neuropsychiatric adverse effects, including changes in mood, depression, anxiety, suicidal ideation and completed suicide have been sporadically reported in patients receiving isotreti.noin, including with positive challenge/dechallenge, suggesting a potential causal association.286,287 However, available low certainty evidence from 4 observational studies with substantial heterogeneity do not support a significant association between isotretinoin use and neuropsychiatric adverse effect incidence.288-291 The overall RR of adverse neuro.psychiatric adverse effects between isotretinoin.exposed and unexposed group is estimated at 0.88 (95% confidence interval 0.77-1.00).288-291 Multiple studies indicate that isotretinoin may improve quality of life and decrease symptoms of anxiety and depression in patients with moderate to severe acne, which could reduce overall risks of neuropsychiatric adverse events at a population level.292-294 However, given high prevalence of depression, anxiety and suicidal ideation/suicide in the general population, and especially the adolescent population who may be candidates for isotretinoin therapy, clinicians should monitor for depression, anxiety, suicidal ideation/suicidality, and other neuropsychiatric adverse effects and individualize therapeutic de.cisions based on individual differences in response to isotretinoin. Notably, the US Preventive Service Task Force recommends screening for depression in adults291 and in adolescents aged 12-18 years295 and recommends screening for anxiety in adolescents aged 8-18 years, 296 regardless of exposure to isotretinoin, each with grade B recommendations that concludes with moderate certainty that such screening yields moderate net benefits. The Patient Health Questionnaire-2 and Patient Health Questionnaire-9 have been proposed as efficient and validated instruments for depression screening with isotretinoin treatment.297 We conditionally recommend daily dosing over intermittent dosing of isotretinoin based on low certainty evidence from 3 RCTs (Supplementary Table LXXIII, available via Mendeley at https:// data.mendeley.com/datasets/z2bmdwwdf9/2).148-150 Greater reductions in global acne grading system score (MD, 1.75 [ 3.38, 0.12]), inflammatory lesion counts (MD, 3.87 [ 5.57, 2.17]), and non.inflammatory lesion counts (MD, 4.53 [ 6.89, 2.17]) were seen in daily dosing (0.5-0.7 mg/kg daily) versus intermittent dosing of isotretinoin (0.5.0.7 mg/kg daily for 1 week out of every 4 weeks) at 24 weeks in an RCT of 33 patients.150 Withdrawal due to adverse effects were more common with daily dosing than intermittent dosing (6.7% vs 0%).150 We conditionally recommend either standard iso.tretinoin or lidose-isotretinoin based on high certainty evidence from 1 study (Supplementary Table LXXIV, available via Mendeley at https://data.mendeley. com/datasets/z2bmdwwdf9/2).151 Standard isotreti.noin has better bioavailability when taken with a high fat meal, whereas the bioavailability of lidose-isotret.inoin is less affected by whether it is taken with food. In an RCT of 782 patients, lidose-isotretinoin showed non-inferiority in reducing facial and truncal nodular lesions and in the proportion of patients achieving $90% reduction of total lesions at 20 weeks (76.9% vs 81.0%; RR, 0.95 [0.88, 1.02]).151 No significant differ.ences in adverse effects or treatment withdrawal was noted.151 Both formulations are available as branded generic prescriptions in the US. Additional potential adverse effects, such as cardiovascular risk, bone mineralization, scarring, and S. aureus colonization, were addressed in the 2016 acne guidelines. Expert consensus from the American Society of Dermatologic Surgery concluded that there is insufficient evidence to justify delaying treatment with superficial chemical peels and nonablative lasers, including hair removal lasers and lights, vascular lasers, and nonablative fractional devices for patients currently receiving or recently received isotretinoin.298 Full-face dermabrasion, mechanical dermabrasion with rotary devices, and ablative laser treatment of the entire face or non-facial regions are not recommended within 6 months of isotretinoin use due to increased risks of adverse events.298 Available evidence is insufﬁcient to directly compare between traditional dosage (0.5mg.1.0 mg/kg/day) and low-dosage (\0.5 mg/kg/day) isotretinoin regimens, between isotretinoin with systemic antibiotics with or without topical thera.pies, and between isotretinoin alone and isotretinoin with topical agents (Supplementary Tables LXXV.LXXX, available via Mendeley at https://data. mendeley.com/datasets/z2bmdwwdf9/2). Although available evidence was insufficient to make a formal recommendation, a few small studies have suggested that low-dose regimens may be associated with similar efficacy and rates of relapse compared to higher-dose regimens.150,254,255 PHYSICAL MODALITIES Physical modalities examined included acne lesion extraction, chemical peels, laser and light-based de.vices, microneedle radiofrequency devices, and photodynamic therapy. Available evidence is insufﬁ.cient to develop a recommendation on the use of acne lesion/comedo extraction, chemical peels (including glycolic acid, trichloroacetic acid, salicylic acid, Jessner’s solution, or mandelic acid), laser and light-based devices (including 585-595 nm pulsed dye laser, neodymium-doped yttrium aluminum garnet laser, 1450 diode laser, potassium titanyl phosphate laser, infrared light-emitting diode, 635-670 nm red light, combined 420 nm blue light and 660 nm red light, 589 nm/1319 nm laser, or intense pulsed light), microneedle radiofrequency device, or photody.namic therapy with aminolevulinic acid for the treatment of acne (Supplementary Tables LXXXI-CLIX, available via Mendeley at https:// data.mendeley.com/datasets/z2bmdwwdf9/2). We conditionally recommend against adding pneumatic broadband light to adapalene 0.3% gel based on low certainty evidence from 1 study (Table III and Supplementary Table CLX, available via Mendeley at https://data.mendeley.com/datasets/ z2bmdwwdf9/2).152 Adding pneumatic broadband light to adapalene did not reduce acne lesion counts and was associated with risks of hyperpigmentation and purpura.152 The 1726 nm laser was cleared by the FDA for acne treatment in 2022299,300; its evidence was not evaluated in the current guidelines due to lack of a RCT. COMPLEMENTARY/ALTERNATIVE THERAPIES Complementary and alternative therapies exam.ined include botanical or plant-derived agents and vitamins. Available evidence is insufﬁcient to develop a recommendation on the use of topical tea tree oil, topical green tea, topical witch hazel, oral pantothenic acid, oral or topical zinc, oral or topical niacinamide for acne treatment (Supplementary Tables CLXI-CLXXIII, available via Mendeley at https://data.mendeley.com/datasets/z2bmdwwdf9/2). DIET Available evidence is conﬂicting on low-glycemic.load diet for acne treatment (Supplementary Tables CLXXIV-CLXXVI, available via Mendeley at https://data.mendeley.com/datasets/z2bmdwwdf9/2). A greater reduction in facial acne score was seen in a low-glycemic-load diet versus a high-glycemic-load diet at 8 weeks in an RCT of 45 patients (MD in change from baseline, 0.3 [ 0.39, 0.21]).301 One RCT of 32 Korean patients showed improvement in the Leeds Revised Acne score at 12 weeks in a low-glycemic-load diet group, but not in control group.247 A greater reduction in total lesion count was seen in a low-glycemic-load diet versus a high.glycemic-load diet at 12 weeks in an RCT of 43 Australian patients (MD in change from baseline, 8.1 [ 14.89, 1.31])302 However, in an RCT of 84 patients, the addition of a low-glycemic diet in patients starting BP 2.5% gel did not result in significant differences in acne lesion counts.303 Available evidence is insufficient to develop a recommendation on the use of low dairy diet, low whey diet, omega-3 fatty acids, and chocolate on acne treatment. GAPS IN RESEARCH AND STUDY LIMITATIONS These guidelines identiﬁed important evidence gaps on the use of microbiology and endocrinology testing in acne, the use of systemic antibiotics beyond tetracycline-class antibiotics, physical mo.dalities, complementary and alternative therapies, dietary interventions for the treatment of acne, and cost-effectiveness of acne treatments. RCT with long-term follow-up and comparative effectiveness research are necessary to examine and compare patient-centered acne treatment outcomes. Increased use of active comparator trials are needed when multiple interventions exist within a treatment class, such as among topical retinoids and topical antibiotics.304,305 Additional research is needed on optimizing value of laboratory monitoring for pa.tients receiving spironolactone and isotretinoin. A list of interventions and comparisons of interven.tions identified, evaluated, and not considered to be viable candidates for recommendation development due to insufficient evidence is available in Supplementary Table CLXXVII, available via Mendeley at https://data.mendeley.com/datasets/ z2bmdwwdf9/2. Tailoring acne management in diverse popula.tions will require incorporation of diversity, equity, and inclusion efforts in the acne research pipeline. Women, patients of color, and sexual and gender minority patients may be disproportionately affected 21,306-308by acne. Many acne RCT specify contracep.tive requirements and exclusion criteria related to hormone therapy.309 To optimize acne care in patients with pregnancy potential and LGBTQ 1 patients, future acne research should incorporate ongoing national efforts to collect high-quality in.formation about sex, gender identity, and sexual orientation and to examine real-life acne treatment effects by including patients with variations in con.309-311traceptive use and hormone therapy status. Additional research on the safety and efficacy of acne treatments in the context of pregnancy and lactation are required.174,312 Patients with skin of color may disproportionately suffer from acne sequelae, including acne-induced hyperpigmentation and keloidal scarring, which may be under-appreciated or undertreated by clini.cians.307 A systematic review of the treatments of acne-associated hyperpigmentation and scarring fall beyond the scope of these guidelines but is an area of important work. In addition to early treatment of acne, common treatments for acne-induced hyper.pigmentation include topical retinoids, azelaic acid, hydroquinone, and physical modalities such as lasers and chemical peels. Common treatments for keloidal scars include topical silicone, intralesional corticosteroids, or lasers. A recent systematic review of 55 studies on acne in skin of color was unable to draw firm conclusions to guide distinct decisions in acne practice in patients with skin of color.307 Only 4 of 55 studies evaluated acne outcomes in Fitzpatrick skin types IV to VI. The lack of research represen.tation was most notable among Black, African American, and Afro-Caribbean patients. Expanding diversity and inclusion of acne RCT will be critical to examine acne treatment in patients with skin of color. This guideline is developed based on analysis of the best available data at the time it was conducted. The results of future studies may necessitate revision of current recommendations. Study limitations included the pragmatic decision to limit the literature review to English language, which may have excluded relevant data published in other languages. Due to the large scope of the review using Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development, and Evaluation methodology, the analysis included only RCTs, which may have limited identiﬁcation of relevant long-term follow-up data. SUMMARY Analysis of the evidence from this systematic review based on 9 clinical questions resulted in 18 evidence-based recommendations and 5 good prac.tice statements for the treatment of acne. Strong recommendations are made for benzoyl peroxide, topical retinoids, and topical antibiotics, as well as for oral doxycycline. Oral isotretinoin is strongly recommended for acne that is severe, causing psychosocial burden or scarring, or failing standard oral or topical therapy. Conditional recommenda.tions are made for topical clascoterone, salicylic acid, azelaic acid, as well as for oral minocycline, sarecycline, COC pills, and spironolactone. Combining topical therapies with multiple mecha.nisms of action, limiting systemic antibiotic use, combining systemic antibiotics with topical therapies, and adding intralesional corticosteroid injections for larger acne lesions are recommended as good practice statements (Table III). We thank Peter A. Lio, MD for his contributions to establishing the scope of the acne guideline update and David A. Castillo and Charniel McDaniels for helping with data extraction and full text article procurement. Conﬂicts of interest Rachel V.S. Reynolds, MD, Carol E. Cheng, MD, Kelly Druby, Megha M. Tollefson, MD, and Jung Min Han, PharmD, MS, have no relationships to disclose. Howa Yeung, MD, MS, serves as an investigator for American Acne & Rosacea Society, Department of Veterans Affairs, and National Institutes of Health receiving grants and research funding; as an independent contractor for American Academy of Dermatology and Journal of the American Medical Association receiving fees; as a speaker/ faculty educator for Dermatology Digest receiving hono.raria. Fran Cook-Bolden, MD, serves as an advisory board member for AbbVie, Dermavant Sciences, Inc., Galderma Global, Novartis, Ortho Dermatologics, and Pﬁzer Inc. receiving honoraria; as an investigator for Arcutis Biotherapeutics receiving grant and research funding; as a speaker for Galderma Laboratories, LP, Journey Medical Corporation, and Ortho Dermatologics receiving honorar.ia; as others for Topix Pharmaceuticals, Inc. receiving other ﬁnancial beneﬁt. Seemal R. Desai, MD, serves an advisory board member for Foundation for Research & Education of Dermatology receiving fees; as a consultant for AbbVie, Allergan, Inc, Almirall, Amgen, Apogee, Avita, Ballature Beauty, Beiersdorf, Inc., Bristol-Myers Squibb, Candela Corporation, Cassiopea S.p.A., Castle Biosciences, Cutera, Inc., Dermavant Sciences, Dermira, Eli Lilly and Company, EPI Health, Ferndale Laboratories, Inc., Foamix, Galderma Laboratories, LP, Gore Range Capital, Hyphens Pharma, Incyte Corporation, Janssen Pharmaceuticals, Inc, Johnson and Johnson, Leo Pharma Inc., L’Oreal USA Inc., Lyceum Health, Ortho Dermatologics, Pﬁzer Inc., Revision Skincare, Sanoﬁ/Regeneron, Scientis, Skin Science Advisors, UCB, Verrica Pharmaceuticals Inc., and VYNE Therapeutics receiving fees, honoraria, and/or stock op.tions; as an investigator for AOBiome, LLC, Atacama Therapeutics, Dermavant Sciences, Incyte Corporation, and SkinMedica, Inc. receiving grants and research fund.ing; as a speaker for AbbVie, Dermira, Galderma Laboratories, LP., and Pﬁzer Inc. receiving fees; as a stockholder for Gore Range Capital; as other role for Medscape receiving fees. Esther E. Freeman, MD, PhD, serves as an investigator for International League of Dermatologic Societies and National Institutes of Health receiving grants and research funding; as an author for UptoDate, Inc. and British Journal of Dermatology, receiving honoraria or salary; as a speaker for Harvard University. Jonette E. Keri, MD, PhD, serves as an advisory board member for Ortho Dermatologics receiving honoraria; as a consultant for Almirall receiving fees; as an investigator for Galderma USA receiving grants and research funding; as a speaker for Foamix Pharmaceuticals Ltd and VYNE Therapeutics receiving honoraria. Linda F. Stein Gold, MD, serves as an advisory board member for AbbVie, Almirall, Aqua, Dermavant Sciences, Foamix, Galderma Laboratories, L.P., GlaxoSmith Kline, Incyte Corporation, La Roche-Posay Laboratorie Pharmaceutique, LEO Pharma, US, Lilly ICOS LLC, Merz Pharmaceuticals, LLC, Pﬁzer Inc., Promius Pharmaceuticals, Sanoﬁ/Regeneron, Taro Pharm, and Valeant Pharmaceuticals International receiving honoraria; as a consultant for AnaptysBio, BMS, Botanix Pharmaceuticals, Cutera, Inc., Incyte Corporation, Janssen Scientiﬁc Affairs, LLC, Sol-Gel Technologies, Taro Pharm, The Acne Store, and UCB receiving honoraria or grants and research funding; as an investigator for AbbVie, Allergan, Inc., AnaptysBio, Galderma Laboratories, L.P., Leo Pharma Inc., Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corp., Pﬁzer Inc., Topica, and Valeant Pharmaceuticals International receiving grants and research funding; as a speaker for Actavis, Almirall, BMS, Dermira, Pﬁzer Inc., Sanoﬁ/ Regeneron, Sun Pharmaceutical Industries Ltd., and VYNE Therapeutics receiving honoraria. Jerry K. L. Tan, MD, serves as an advisory board member for Abbott Laboratories, Cutera, Inc., Galderma Laboratories, L.P, and Sun Pharmaceutical Industries Ltd receiving honoraria or grants and research funding; as a consultant for Bausch Health, Boots, Galderma Research & Development, LLC, and Loreal Research and Innovation receiving honoraria; as an independent contractor for Norvatis receiving fees; as an investigator for Allergan, AnaptysBio, Cutera, Inc., Eli Lilly and Co., Galderma Laboratories, L.P, Lilly ICOS LLC, Pﬁzer, and UCB for receiving grants and research funding; as a speaker for Bausch Health, LEO Laboratories Ltd (LEO Pharma), and Vichy Laboratories receiving honoraria. Jonathan S. Weiss, MD, serves as an advisory board member for Bristol-Myers Squibb, Dermavant Sciences, Foamix, Galderma Laboratories, L.P., Incyte Corporation, Novartis, and UCB receiving honoraria; as a consultant for Arcutis, Inc., Biofrontera, Cutera, Inc., Leo Pharma Inc, Ortho Dermatologics, and UCB receiving fees or honorar.ia; as an investigator for AbbVie, Bausch Health, Biofrontera, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Cutera, Inc., Dermavant Sciences, Foamix, Galderma Laboratories, L.P., LEO Pharma, Mindera, Moberg Pharma North, America LLC, Novartis, Palvella Therapeutics, and Verrica Pharmaceuticals Inc receiving grants and research funding; as a speaker for AbbVie, Arcutis, Inc., Galderma Laboratories, L.P., Ortho Dermatologics, Regeneron, and Sanoﬁ Genzyme receiving honoraria. Peggy A. Wu, MD, serves as others for UptoDate, Inc. receiving honoraria. Andrea L. Zaenglein, MD, serves as a consultant for Church & Dwight Co., Inc. and UCB receiving fees or honoraria; as an investigator for AbbVie, Arcutis Biotherapeutics, Biofrontera AG, Galderma Laboratories, L.P., and Incyte Corporation receiving grants and research funding. John S. Barbieri, MD, MBA serves as investigator for National Institutes of Health and National Psoriasis Foundation receiving grants and research funding. REFERENCES 1. Lim HW, Collins SAB, Resneck JS Jr, et al. The burden of skin disease in the United States. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2017;76: 958-972.e2. 2. Chen H, Zhang TC, Yin XL, et al. Magnitude and temporal trend of acne vulgaris burden in 204 countries and territories from 1990 to 2019: an analysis from the global burden of disease study 2019. Br J Dermatol. 2022;186:673-683. 3. Zaenglein AL, Pathy AL, Schlosser BJ, et al. Guidelines of care for the management of acne vulgaris. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2016;74:945-973.e33. 4. Eichenfield LF, Krakowski AC, Piggott C, et al. Evidence-based recommendations for the diagnosis and treatment of pediatric acne. Pediatrics. 2013;131(Suppl 3):S163-S186. 5. Andrews J, Guyatt G, Oxman AD, et al. GRADE guidelines: 14. Going from evidence to recommendations: the significance and presentation of recommendations. J Clin Epidemiol. 2013; 66:719-725. 6. Andrews JC, Schunemann HJ, Oxman AD, et al. GRADE guidelines: 15. Going from evidence to recommendation.determinants of a recommendation’s direction and strength. J Clin Epidemiol. 2013;66:726-735. 7. Guyatt GH, Alonso-Coello P, Schunemann HJ, et al. Guideline panels should seldom make good practice statements: guidance from the GRADE Working Group. J Clin Epidemiol. 2016;80:3-7. 8. Eichenfield DZ, Sprague J, Eichenfield LF. Management of acne vulgaris: a review. JAMA. 2021;326:2055-2067. 9. Hay RJ, Johns NE, Williams HC, et al. The global burden of skin disease in 2010: an analysis of the prevalence and impact of skin conditions. JInvest Dermatol. 2014;134:1527-1534. 10. Bhate K, Williams HC. Epidemiology of acne vulgaris. Br J Dermatol. 2013;168:474-485. 11. Karimkhani C, Dellavalle RP, Coffeng LE, et al. Global skin disease morbidity and mortality: an update from the global burden of disease study 2013. JAMA Dermatol. 2017; 153:406-412. 12. White GM. Recent findings in the epidemiologic evidence, classification, and subtypes of acne vulgaris. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1998;39:S34-S37. 13. Fabbrocini G, Cacciapuoti S, Monfrecola G. A qualitative investigation of the impact of acne on health-related quality of life (HRQL): development of a conceptual model. Dermatol Ther. 2018;8:85-99. 14. Barbieri JS, Fulton R, Neergaard R, Nelson MN, Barg FK, Margolis DJ. Patient perspectives on the lived experience of acne and its treatment among adult women with acne: a qualitative study. JAMA Dermatol. 2021;157:1040-1046. 15. Mallon E, Newton JN, Klassen A, Stewart-Brown SL, Ryan TJ, Finlay AY. The quality of life in acne: a comparison with general medical conditions using generic questionnaires. Br J Dermatol. 1999;140:672-676. 16. Cresce ND, Davis SA, Huang WW, Feldman SR. The quality of life impact of acne and rosacea compared to other major medical conditions. J Drugs Dermatol. 2014;13:692-697. 17. Gupta MA, Gupta AK. Depression and suicidal ideation in dermatology patients with acne, alopecia areata, atopic dermatitis and psoriasis. Br J Dermatol. 1998;139:846-850. 18. Magin P, Adams J, Heading G, Pond D, Smith W. Experiences of appearance-related teasing and bullying in skin diseases and their psychological sequelae: results of a qualitative study. Scand J Caring Sci. 2008;22:430-436. 19. Ritvo E, Del Rosso JQ, Stillman MA, La Riche C. Psychosocial judgements and perceptions of adolescents with acne vulgaris: a blinded, controlled comparison of adult and peer evaluations. Biopsychosoc Med. 2011;5:11. 20. Purvis D, Robinson E, Merry S, Watson P. Acne, anxiety, depression and suicide in teenagers: a cross-sectional survey of New Zealand secondary school students. J Paediatr Child Health. 2006;42:793-796. 21. Heng AHS, Chew FT. Systematic review of the epidemiology of acne vulgaris. Sci Rep. 2020;10:5754. 22. Layton AM, Whitehouse H, Eady EA, Cowdell F, Warburton KL, Fenton M. Prioritizing treatment outcomes: how people with acne vulgaris decide if their treatment is working. J Evid Based Med. 2017;10:163-170. 23. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Food and Drug Administration, Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER). Guidance for Industry. Acne Vulgaris: Developing Drugs for Treatment. Silver Spring; 2005. 24. O’Brien S, Lewis J, Cunliffe W. The Leeds revised acne grading system. J Dermatol Treat. 1998;9:215-220. 25. Doshi A, Zaheer A, Stiller MJ. A comparison of current acne grading systems and proposal of a novel system. Int J Dermatol. 1997;36:416-418. 26. Dreno B, Poli F, Pawin H, et al. Development and evaluation of a global acne severity scale (GEA scale) suitable for France and Europe. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2011;25: 43-48. 27. Tan JK, Tang J, Fung K, et al. Development and validation of a comprehensive acne severity scale. J Cutan Med Surg. 2007; 11:211-216. 28. Patel DP, Bernardis E, Yan AC. The patient-centered acne severity scale study. Pediatr Dermatol. 2017;34:656-660. 29. Bernardis E, Shou H, Barbieri JS, et al. Development and initial validation of a multidimensional acne global grading system integrating primary lesions and secondary changes. JAMA Dermatol. 2020;156:296-302. 30. Cho SI, Yang JH, Suh DH. Analysis of trends and status of physician-based evaluation methods in acne vulgaris from 2000 to 2019. J Dermatol. 2021;48:42-48. 31. Stein Gold L, Tan J, Kircik L. Evolution of acne assessments and impact on acne medications: an evolving, imperfect paradigm. J Drugs Dermatol. 2016;15:79-86. 32. Tan JK, Jones E, Allen E, Pripotnev S, Raza A, Wolfe B. Evaluation of essential clinical components and features of current acne global grading scales. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2013;69:754-761. 33. Tan J, Wolfe B, Weiss J, et al. Acne severity grading: determining essential clinical components and features using a Delphi consensus. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2012;67: 187-193. 34. Gottlieb A, Salame N, Armstrong AW, et al. A provider global assessment quality measure for clinical practice for inflam.matory skin disorders. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2019;80:823-828. 35. Becker M, Wild T, Zouboulis CC. Objective assessment of acne. Clin Dermatol. 2017;35:147-155. 36. Chernyshov PV, Zouboulis CC, Tomas-Aragones L, et al. Quality of life measurement in acne. Position paper of the European Academy of Dermatology and Venereology task forces on quality of life and patient oriented outcomes and acne, rosacea and hidradenitis suppurativa. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2018;32:194-208. 37. Marron SE, Chernyshov PV, Tomas-Aragones L. Quality-of-Life research in acne vulgaris: current status and future directions. Am J Clin Dermatol. 2019;20:527-538. 38. Hopkins ZH, Thiboutot D, Homsi HA, Perez-Chada LM, Barbieri JS. Patient-reported outcome measures for health.related quality of life in patients with acne vulgaris: a systematic review of measure development and measure.ment properties. JAMA Dermatol. 2022;158:900-911. 39. Fitz-Gibbon S, Tomida S, Chiu BH, et al. Propionibacterium acnes strain populations in the human skin microbiome associated with acne. J Invest Dermatol. 2013;133:2152-2160. 40. Miura Y, Ishige I, Soejima N, et al. Quantitative PCR of Propionibacterium acnes DNA in samples aspirated from sebaceous follicles on the normal skin of subjects with or without acne. J Med Dent Sci. 2010;57:65-74. 41. Akaza N, Akamatsu H, Numata S, et al. Microorganisms inhabiting follicular contents of facial acne are not only Propionibacterium but also Malassezia spp. J Dermatol. 2016; 43:906-911. 42. Jusuf NK, Putra IB, Sari L. Differences of microbiomes found in non-inflammatory and inflammatory lesions of acne vulgaris. Clin Cosmet Investig Dermatol. 2020;13:773-780. 43. Dreno B, Martin R, Moyal D, Henley JB, Khammari A, SeiteS. Skin microbiome and acne vulgaris: staphylococcus, a new actor in acne. Exp Dermatol. 2017;26:798-803. 44. Kim J, Park T, Kim HJ, An S, Sul WJ. Inferences in microbial structural signatures of acne microbiome and mycobiome. J Microbiol. 2021;59:369-375. 45. Numata S, Akamatsu H, Akaza N, Yagami A, Nakata S, Matsunaga K. Analysis of facial skin-resident microbiota in Japanese acne patients. Dermatology. 2014;228:86-92. 46. Ergin C, Ergin S, Kaleli I, Kac¸ar N, Sengul€ M, Erdogan BS. Nasal antibiotic-resistant Propionibacterium acnes carriage in acne vulgaris patients in Turkey. J Dermatol. 2006;33: 899-901. 47. Schafer F, Fich F, Lam M, Garate C, Wozniak A, Garcia P. Antimicrobial susceptibility and genetic characteristics of Propionibacterium acnes isolated from patients with acne. Int J Dermatol. 2013;52:418-425. 48. Franik G, BizonA, W1och S, Kowalczyk K, Biernacka-Bartnik A, Madej P. Hormonal and metabolic aspects of acne vulgaris in women with polycystic ovary syndrome. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2018;22:4411-4418. 49. Kiayani AJ, Rehman FU. Association of serum testosterone and sex hormone binding globulin levels in females with acne based on its severity. J Ayub Med Coll Abbottabad. 2016; 28:357-359. 50. Martin KA, Anderson RR, Chang RJ, et al. Evaluation and treatment of hirsutism in premenopausal women: an endo.crine society clinical practice guideline. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2018;103:1233-1257. 51. Seirafi H, Farnaghi F, Vasheghani-Farahani A, et al. Assess.ment of androgens in women with adult-onset acne. Int J Dermatol. 2007;46:1188-1191. 52. Schmidt JB, Lindmaier A, Spona J. Endocrine parameters in acne vulgaris. Endocrinol Exp. 1990;24:457-464. 53. Lucky AW, McGuire J, Rosenfield RL, Lucky PA, Rich BH. Plasma androgens in women with acne vulgaris. J Invest Dermatol. 1983;81:70-74. 54. Timpatanapong P, Rojanasakul A. Hormonal profiles and prevalence of polycystic ovary syndrome in women with acne. J Dermatol. 1997;24:223-229. 55. Arora MK, Seth S, Dayal S. The relationship of lipid profile and menstrual cycle with acne vulgaris. Clin Biochem. 2010;43: 1415-1420. 56. Abulnaja KO. Changes in the hormone and lipid profile of obese adolescent Saudi females with acne vulgaris. Braz J Med Biol Res. 2009;42:501-505. 57. Saleh BO. Role of growth hormone and insulin-like growth factor-I in hyperandrogenism and the severity of acne vulgaris in young males. Saudi Med J. 2012;33:1196-1200. 58. Tyring SK, Kircik LH, Pariser DM, Guenin E, Bhatt V, Pillai R. Novel tretinoin 0.05% lotion for the once-daily treatment of moderate-to-severe acne vulgaris: assessment of efficacy and safety in patients aged 9 years and older. J Drugs Dermatol JDD. 2018;17(10):1084-1091. 59. Thiboutot D, Pariser DM, Egan N, et al. Adapalene gel 0.3% for the treatment of acne vulgaris: a multicenter, random.ized, double-blind, controlled, phase III trial. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2006;54:242-250. 60. Shalita AR, Chalker DK, Griffith RF, et al. Tazarotene gel is safe and effective in the treatment of acne vulgaris: a multicenter, double-blind, vehicle-controlled study. Cutis. 1999;63:349.354. 61. Tanghetti EA, Werschler WP, Lain T, Guenin E, Martin G, Pillai R. Tazarotene 0.045% lotion for once-daily treatment of moderate-to-severe acne vulgaris: results from two phase 3 trials. J Drugs Dermatol. 2020;19:70-77. 62. Tan J, Thiboutot D, Popp G, et al. Randomized phase 3 evaluation of trifarotene 50 mug/g cream treatment of moderate facial and truncal acne. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2019;80(6):1691-1699. 63. Webster GF, Sugarman J, Levy-Hacham O, Toledano O. Microencapsulated benzoyl peroxide and tretinoin for the treatment of acne vulgaris: results from a phase 2 multicenter, double-blind, randomized, vehicle-controlled study. Skinmed. 2020;18(6):343-351. 64. Gollnick HP, Draelos Z, Glenn MJ, et al. Adapalene-benzoyl peroxide, a unique fixed-dose combination topical gel for the treatment of acne vulgaris: a transatlantic, randomized, double-blind, controlled study in 1670 patients. Br J Derma.tol. 2009;161:1180-1189. 65. Kawashima M, Hashimoto H, Alio Saenz AB, Ono M, Yamada M. Is benzoyl peroxide 3% topical gel effective and safe in the treatment of acne vulgaris in Japanese patients? A multicenter, randomized, double.blind, vehicle-controlled, parallel-group study. J Dermatol. 2014;41(9):795-801. 66. Eichenfield LF, Alio Saenz AB. Safety and efficacy of clinda.mycin phosphate 1.2%-benzoyl peroxide 3% fixed-dose combination gel for the treatment of acne vulgaris: a phase 3, multicenter, randomized, double-blind, active-and vehicle-controlled study. J Drugs Dermatol. 2011;10:1382.1396. 67. Smith EB, Padilla RS, McCabe JM, Becker LE. Benzoyl peroxide lotion (20 percent) in acne. Cutis. 1980;25:90-92. 68. Chalker DK, Shalita A, Smith JG, Swann RW. A double-blind study of the effectiveness of a 3% erythromycin and 5% benzoyl peroxide combination in the treatment of acne vulgaris. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1983;9:933-936. 69. Lookingbill DP, Chalker DK, Lindholm JS, et al. Treatment of acne with a combination clindamycin/benzoyl peroxide gel compared with clindamycin gel, benzoyl peroxide gel and vehicle gel: combined results of two double-blind investiga.tions. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1997;37:590-595. 70. Hughes BR, Norris JF, Cunliffe WJ. A double-blind evaluation of topical isotretinoin 0.05%, benzoyl peroxide gel 5% and placebo in patients with acne. Clin Exp Dermatol. 1992;17: 165-168. 71. Jarratt MT, Brundage T. Efficacy and safety of clindamycin.tretinoin gel versus clindamycin or tretinoin alone in acne vulgaris: a randomized, double-blind, vehicle-controlled study. J Drugs Dermatol. 2012;11:318-326. 72. Trifu V, Tiplica GS, Naumescu E, Zalupca L, Moro L, Celasco G. Cortexolone 17alpha-propionate 1% cream, a new potent antiandrogen for topical treatment of acne vulgaris. A pilot randomized, double-blind comparative study vs. placebo and tretinoin 0.05% cream. Br J Dermatol. 2011; 165:177-183. 73. Baldwin HE, Green LJ, Kircik L, Guenin EP, Forest AL, Pillai R. Tazarotene 0.045% lotion for moderate-to-severe acne in male and female participants: a phase II post-hoc analysis. J Clin Aesthet Dermatol. 2021;14:E53-E60. 74. Lain E, Day D, Harper J, Guenin E. Tretinoin 0.05% lotion for the once-daily treatment of moderate-to-severe acne vulga.ris: impact of gender and Race on efficacy and safety. J Drugs Dermatol. 2019;18(11):1128-1138. 75. Green LJ, Del Rosso JQ, Tanghetti EA, Guenin E. Tazarotene 0.045% lotion for moderate-to-severe acne patients: pooled phase 3 analysis by age and sex. J Drugs Dermatol. 2021; 20(6):608-615. 76. Stein Gold L, Pariser DM, Guenin E. Tretinoin 0.05% lotion for the once-daily treatment of moderate and severe acne vulgaris in females: effect of age on efficacy and tolerability. J Drugs Dermatol. 2019;18(12):1218-1225. 77. Paracha MM, Ullah I, Zahoor H, Kammal K. Efficacy and safety of short term use of 0.1% tazarotene gel in the treatment of mild to moderate acne vulgaris: a randomized-vehicle controlled trial. J Postgrad Med Inst. 2020;34(2):134-138. 78. Alirezai M, George SA, Coutts I, et al. Daily treatment with adapalene gel 0.1% maintains initial improvement of acne vulgaris previously treated with oral lymecycline. Eur J Dermatol. 2007;17:45-51. 79. Glass D, Boorman GC, Stables GI, Cunliffe WJ, Goode K. A placebo-controlled clinical trial to compare a gel containing a combination of isotretinoin (0.05%) and erythromycin (2%) with gels containing isotretinoin (0.05%) or erythromycin (2%) alone in the topical treatment of acne vulgaris. Dermatology (Basel, Switzerland). 1999;199:242-247. 80. Tanghetti EA, Kircik LH, Green LJ, et al. A phase 2, multicenter, double-blind, randomized, vehicle-controlled clinical study to compare the safety and efficacy of a novel tazarotene 0.045% lotion and tazarotene 0.1% cream in the treatment of moderate-to-severe acne vulgaris. J Drugs Dermatol. 2019;18(6):542. 81. Chalker DK, Lesher JL, Smith JG, et al. Efficacy of topical isotretinoin 0.05% gel in acne vulgaris: results of a multi.center, double-blind investigation. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1987; 17:251-254. 82. Harper JC, Baldwin H, Stein Gold L, Guenin E. Efficacy and tolerability of a novel tretinoin 0.05% lotion for the once.daily treatment of moderate or severe acne vulgaris in adult females. J Drugs Dermatol. 2019;18(11):1147-1154. 83. Lucky AW, Maloney JM, Roberts J, et al. Dapsone gel 5% for the treatment of acne vulgaris: safety and efficacy of long.term (1 year) treatment. J Drugs Dermatol. 2007;6:981-987. 84. Eichenfield LF, Lain T, Frankel EH, et al. Efficacy and safety of once-daily dapsone gel, 7.5% for treatment of adolescents and adults with acne vulgaris: second of two identically designed, large, multicenter, randomized, vehicle-controlled trials. J Drugs Dermatol. 2016;15(8):962-969. 85. Stein Gold LF, Jarratt MT, Bucko AD, et al. Efficacy and safety of once-daily dapsone gel, 7.5% for treatment of adolescents and adults with acne vulgaris: first of two identically designed, large, multicenter, randomized, vehicle-controlled trials. J Drugs Dermatol. 2016;15(5):553-561. 86. Alexis A, Del Rosso JQ, Desai SR, et al. BPX-01 minocycline topical gel shows promise for the treatment of moderate.tosevere inflammatory acne vulgaris. J Clin Aesthet Dermatol. 2018;11(11):25-35. 87. Raoof TJ, Hooper D, Moore A, et al. Efficacy and safety of a novel topical minocycline foam for the treatment of moder.ate to severe acne vulgaris: a phase 3 study. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2020;82(4):832-837. 88. Pochi PE, Bagatell FK, Ellis CN, et al. Erythromycin 2 percent gel in the treatment of acne vulgaris. Cutis. 1988;41:132-136. 89. Dobson RL, Belknap BS. Topical erythromycin solution in acne: results of a multiclinic trial. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1980;3: 478-482. 90. Bernstein JE, Shalita AR. Topically applied erythromycin in inflammatory acne vulgaris. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1980;2:318.321. 91. Lesher JL, Chalker DK, Smith JG, et al. An evaluation of a 2% erythromycin ointment in the topical therapy of acne vulgaris. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1985;12:526-531. 92. Becker LE, Bergstresser PR, Whiting DA, et al. Topical clindamycin therapy for acne vulgaris. A cooperative clinical study. Arch Dermatol. 1981;117:482-485. 93. Hebert A, Thiboutot D, Stein Gold L, et al. Efficacy and safety of topical clascoterone cream, 1%, for treatment in patients with facial acne: two phase 3 randomized clinical trials. JAMA Dermatology. 2020;156(6):621-630. 94. Mazzetti A, Moro L, Gerloni M, Cartwright M. A phase 2b, randomized, double-blind vehicle controlled, dose escalation study evaluating clascoterone 0.1%, 0.5%, and 1% topical cream in subjects with facial. Acne. 2019;1:570. 95. Shalita AR. Treatment of mild and moderate acne vulgaris with salicylic acid in an alcohol-detergent vehicle. Cutis. 1981; 28:556-558, 561. 96. Cunliffe WJ, Holland KT. Clinical and laboratory studies on treatment with 20% azelaic acid cream for acne. Acta Derm Venereol Suppl. 1989;143:31-34. 97. Katsambas A, Graupe K, Stratigos J. Clinical studies of 20% azelaic acid cream in the treatment of acne vulgaris. Com.parison with vehicle and topical tretinoin. Acta Derm Venereol Suppl. 1989;143:35-39. 98. Iraji F, Sadeghinia A, Shahmoradi Z, Siadat AH, Jooya A. Efficacy of topical azelaic acid gel in the treatment of mild.moderate acne vulgaris. Indian J Dermatol Venereol Leprol. 2007;73:94-96. 99. Stein Gold L, Baldwin H, Kircik LH, et al. Efficacy and safety of a fixed-dose clindamycin phosphate 1.2%, benzoyl peroxide 3.1%, and adapalene 0.15% gel for moderate-to-severe acne: a randomized phase II study of the first triple-combination drug. Am J Clin Dermatol. 2022;23(1):93-104. 100. Harper JC. The efficacy and tolerability of a fixed combination clindamycin (1.2%) and benzoyl peroxide (3.75%) aqueous gel in patients with facial acne vulgaris: gender as a clinically relevant outcome variable. J Drugs Dermatol. 2015;14(4):381.384. 101. Pariser DM, Rich P, Cook-Bolden FE, Korotzer A. An aqueous gel fixed combination of clindamycin phosphate 1.2% and benzoyl peroxide 3.75% for the once-daily treatment of moderate to severe acne vulgaris. J Drugs Dermatol. 2014; 13(9):1083-1089. 102. Cook-Bolden FE. Efficacy and tolerability of a fixed combina.tion of clindamycin phosphate (1.2%) and benzoyl peroxide (3.75%) aqueous gel in moderate or severe adolescent acne vulgaris. J Clin Aesthet Dermatol. 2015;8(5):28-32. 103. Gold MH, Korotzer A. Sub-group analyses from a trial of a fixed combination of clindamycin phosphate 1.2% and benzoyl peroxide 3.75% gel for the treatment of moderate-to-severe acne vulgaris. J Clin Aesthet Dermatol. 2015;8(12):22-26. 104. Stein Gold L. Efficacy and tolerability of a fixed combination of clindamycin phosphate (1.2%) and benzoyl peroxide (3.75%) aqueous gel in moderate and severe acne vulgaris subpopulations. J Drugs Dermatol. 2015;14(9):969-974. 105. Guerra-Tapia A. Effects of benzoyl peroxide 5% clindamycin combination gel versus adapalene 0.1% on quality of life in patients with mild to moderate acne vulgaris: a randomized single-blind study. J Drugs Dermatol. 2012;11:714-722. 106. Langner A, Chu A, Goulden V, Ambroziak M. A randomized, single-blind comparison of topical clindamycin 1 benzoyl peroxide and adapalene in the treatment of mild to moder.ate facial acne vulgaris. Br J Dermatol. 2008;158:122-129. 107. Dogra S, Sumathy TK, Nayak C, et al. Efficacy and safety comparison of combination of 0.04% tretinoin microspheres plus 1% clindamycin versus their monotherapy in patients with acne vulgaris: a phase 3, randomized, double-blind study. J Dermatolog Treat. 2021;32(8):925-933. 108. Tanghetti E, Dhawan S, Green L, et al. Clinical evidence for the role of a topical anti-inflammatory agent in comedonal acne: findings from a randomized study of dapsone gel 5% in combination with tazarotene cream 0.1% in patients with acne vulgaris. J Drugs Dermatol. 2011;10:783-792. 109. Dreno B, Bissonnette R, Gagne-Henley A, et al. Prevention and reduction of atrophic acne scars with adapalene 0.3%/benzoyl peroxide 2.5% gel in subjects with moderate or severe facial acne: results of a 6-month randomized, vehicle-controlled trial using intra-individual comparison. Am J Clin Dermatol. 2018;19(2):275-286. 110. Weiss J, Gold LS, Leoni M, Rueda MJ, Liu H, Tanghetti E. Customized single-agent therapy management of severe inflammatory acne: a randomized, double-blind, parallel.group, controlled study of a new treatment -adapalene 0.3%-benzoyl peroxide 2.5% gel. J Drugs Dermatol. 2015; 14(12):1427-1435. 111. Stein Gold L, Weiss J, Rueda MJ, Liu H, Tanghetti E. Moderate and severe inflammatory acne vulgaris effectively treated with single-agent therapy by a new fixed-dose combination adapalene 0.3 %/benzoyl peroxide 2.5 % gel: a randomized, double-blind, parallel-group, controlled study. Am J Clin Dermatol. 2016;17(3):293-303. 112. Stein Gold L, Werschler WP, Mohawk J. Adapalene/benzoyl peroxide gel 0.3%/2.5%: effective acne therapy regardless of age or gender. J Drugs Dermatol. 2017;16(6):582-589. 113. Kwon HH, Park SY, Yoon JY, Min S, Suh DH. Do tutorials on application method enhance adapalene-benzoyl peroxide combination gel tolerability in the treatment of acne? J Dermatol. 2015;42(11):1058-1065. 114. Margolis DJ, Fanelli M, Hoffstad O, Lewis JD. Potential association between the oral tetracycline class of antimicro.bials used to treat acne and inflammatory bowel disease. Am J Gastroenterol. 2010;105:2610-2616. 115. Skidmore R, Kovach R, Walker C, et al. Effects of subantimicrobial-dose doxycycline in the treatment of mod.erate acne. Arch Dermatol. 2003;139:459-464. 116. Leyden JJ, Bruce S, Lee CS, et al. A randomized, phase 2, dose-ranging study in the treatment of moderate to severe inflammatory facial acne vulgaris with doxycycline calcium. J Drugs Dermatol. 2013;12:658-663. 117. Moore A, Ling M, Bucko A, Manna V, Rueda MJ. Efficacy and safety of subantimicrobial dose, modified-release doxycy.cline 40 mg versus doxycycline 100 mg versus placebo for the treatment of inflammatory lesions in moderate and severe acne: a randomized, double-blinded, controlled study. J Drugs Dermatol. 2015;14:581-586. 118. Plewig G, Petrozzi JW, Berendes U. Double-blind study of doxycycline in acne vulgaris. Arch Dermatol. 1970;101:435.438. 119. Fleischer AB Jr, Dinehart S, Stough D, Plott RT, Solodyn Phase 2 Study G, Solodyn Phase 3 Study G. Safety and efficacy of a new extended-release formulation of minocycline. Cutis. 2006;78:21-31. 120. StewartDM,TorokHM,WeissJS,PlottRT,SolodynPhase2Study G. Dose-ranging efficacy of new once-daily extended-release minocycline for acne vulgaris. Cutis. 2006;78:11-20. 121. Leyden J, Bergfeld W, Drake L, et al. A systemic type 15.reductase inhibitor is ineffective in the treatment of acne vulgaris. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2004;50:443-447. 122. Hersle K, Gisslen H. Minocycline in acne vulgaris: a double.blind study. Curr Ther Res Clin Exp. 1976;19:339-342. 123. Moore A, Green LJ, Bruce S, et al. Once-daily oral sarecycline 1.5 mg/kg/day is effective for moderate to severe acne vulgaris: results from two identically designed, phase 3, randomized, double-blind clinical trials. J Drugs Dermatol. 2018;17:987-996. 124. Leyden JJ, Sniukiene V, Berk DR, Kaoukhov A. Efficacy and safety of sarecycline, a novel, once-daily, narrow spectrum antibiotic for the treatment of moderate to severe facial acne vulgaris: results of a phase 2, dose-ranging study. J Drugs Dermatol. 2018;17:333-338. 125. Pariser DM, Green LJ, Lain EL, et al. Safety and tolerability of sarecycline for the treatment of acne vulgaris: results from a phase III, multicenter, open-Label study and a phase I phototoxicity study. J Clin Aesthet Dermatol. 2019;12:E53-E62. 126. Maleszka R, Turek-Urasinska K, Oremus M, Vukovic J, Barsic B. Pulsed azithromycin treatment is as effective and safe as 2.week-longer daily doxycycline treatment of acne vulgaris: a randomized, double-blind, noninferiority study. Skinmed. 2011;9:86-94. 127. Babaeinejad S, Khodaeiani E, Fouladi RF. Comparison of therapeutic effects of oral doxycycline and azithromycin in patients with moderate acne vulgaris: what is the role of age? J Dermatol Treat. 2011;22:206-210. 128. Ullah G, Noor SM, Bhatti Z, Ahmad M, Bangash AR. Compar.ison of oral azithromycin with oral doxycycline in the treatment of acne vulgaris. J Ayub Med Coll Abbottabad. 2014;26:64-67. 129. Kus S, Yucelten D, Aytug A. Comparison of efficacy of azithromycin vs. doxycycline in the treatment of acne vulgaris. Clin Exp Dermatol. 2005;30:215-220. 130. Maloney JM, Dietze P Jr, Watson D, et al. Treatment of acne using a 3-milligram drospirenone/20-microgram ethinyl estradiol oral contraceptive administered in a 24/4 regimen: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol. 2008;112:773.781. 131. Thiboutot D, Archer DF, Lemay A, Washenik K, Roberts J, Harrison DD. A randomized, controlled trial of a low-dose contraceptive containing 20 microg of ethinyl estradiol and 100 microg of levonorgestrel for acne treatment. Fertil Steril. 2001;76:461-468. 132. Leyden J, Shalita A, Hordinsky M, Swinyer L, Stanczyk FZ, Weber ME.Efficacy of a low-dose oral contraceptive containing 20 microgof ethinyl estradioland 100 microg of levonorgestrel for the treatment of moderate acne: a randomized, placebo.controlled trial. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2002;47:399-409. 133. Redmond GP, Olson WH, Lippman JS, Kafrissen ME, Jones TM, Jorizzo JL. Norgestimate and ethinyl estradiol in the treat.ment of acne vulgaris: a randomized, placebo-controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol. 1997;89:615-622. 134. Lucky AW, Henderson TA, Olson WH, Robisch DM, Lebwohl M, Swinyer LJ. Effectiveness of norgestimate and ethinyl estradiol in treating moderate acne vulgaris. JAm Acad Dermatol. 1997;37:746-754. 135. Palombo-Kinne E, Schellschmidt I, Schumacher U, Graser T. Efficacy of a combined oral contraceptive containing 0.030 mg ethinylestradiol/2 mg dienogest for the treatment of papulopustular acne in comparison with placebo and 0.035 mg ethinylestradiol/2 mg cyproterone acetate. Contracep.tion. 2009;79:282-289. 136. Maloney JM Arbit D, Flack M, McLaughlin-Miley C, Sevilla C, Derman R. Use of low-dose oral contraceptive containing norethindrone acetate and ethinyl estradiol in the treatment of moderate acne vulgaris. Clin J Wom Health. 2001;1:123-131. 137. Koltun W, Lucky AW, Thiboutot D, et al. Efficacy and safety of 3 mg drospirenone/20 mcg ethinylestradiol oral contracep.tive administered in 24/4 regimen in the treatment of acne vulgaris: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Contraception. 2008;77:249-256. 138. Plewig G, Cunliffe WJ, Binder N, Hoschen K. Efficacy of an oral contraceptive containing EE 0.03 mg and CMA 2 mg (Belara) in moderate acne resolution: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled phase III trial. Contraception. 2009;80:25-33. 139. Katz HI, Kempers S, Akin MD, Dunlap F, Whiting D, Norbart TC. Effect of a desogestrel-containing oral contraceptive on the skin. Eur J Contracept Reprod Health Care. 2000;5:248-255. 140. Patiyasikunt M, Chancheewa B, Asawanonda P, Noppakun N, Kumtornrut C. Efficacy and tolerability of low-dose spirono.lactone and topical benzoyl peroxide in adult female acne: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. J Derma.tol. 2020;47:1411-1416. 141. Goodfellow A, Alaghband-Zadeh J, Carter G, et al. Oral spironolactone improves acne vulgaris and reduces sebum excretion. Br J Dermatol. 1984;111:209-214. 142. Muhlemann MF, Carter GD, Cream JJ, Wise P. Oral spirono.lactone: an effective treatment for acne vulgaris in women. Br J Dermatol. 1986;115:227-232. 143. Barbieri JS, Margolis DJ, Mostaghimi A. Temporal trends and clinician variability in potassium monitoring of healthy young women treated for acne with spironolactone. JAMA Derma.tol. 2021;157:296-300. 144. Grandhi R, Alikhan A. Spironolactone for the treatment of acne: a 4-year retrospective study. Dermatology. 2017;233:141-144. 145. Plovanich M, Weng QY, Mostaghimi A. Low usefulness of potassium monitoring among healthy young women taking spironolactone for acne. JAMA Dermatol. 2015;151:941-944. 146. Sato K, Matsumoto D, Iizuka F, et al. Anti-androgenic therapy using oral spironolactone for acne vulgaris in Asians. Aesthetic Plast Surg. 2006;30:689-694. 147. Thiede RM, Rastogi S, Nardone B, et al. Hyperkalemia in women with acne exposed to oral spironolactone: a retro.spective study from the RADAR (Research on Adverse Drug Events and Reports) program. Int J Womens Dermatol. 2019;5: 155-157. 148. Agarwal US, Besarwal RK, Bhola K. Oral isotretinoin in different dose regimens for acne vulgaris: a randomized comparative trial. Indian J Dermatol Venereol Leprol. 2011;77: 688-694. 149. Akman A, Durusoy C, Senturk M, Koc CK, Soyturk D, Alpsoy E. Treatment of acne with intermittent and conventional iso.tretinoin: a randomized, controlled multicenter study. Arch Dermatol Res. 2007;299:467-473. 150. Lee JW, Yoo KH, Park KY, et al. Effectiveness of conventional, low-dose and intermittent oral isotretinoin in the treatment of acne: a randomized, controlled comparative study. Br J Dermatol. 2011;164:1369-1375. 151. Webster GF, Leyden JJ, Gross JA. Results of a phase III, double-blind, randomized, parallel-group, non-inferiority study evaluating the safety and efficacy of isotretinoin-Lidose in patients with severe recalcitrant nodular acne. J Drugs Dermatol. 2014;13:665-670. 152. Tangjaturonrusamee C, Rattanaumpawan P, Ditre CM. Com.parison of pneumatic broadband light plus adapalene gel 0.3% versus adapalene gel 0.3% monotherapy in the treatment of mild to moderate acne. Cutis. 2016;98(1):56-61. 153. Shalita A, Weiss JS, Chalker DK, et al. A comparison of the efficacy and safety of adapalene gel 0.1% and tretinoin gel 0.025% in the treatment of acne vulgaris: a multicenter trial. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1996;34:482-485. 154. Lucky AW, Cullenb SI, Jarratt MT, Quigley JW. Comparative efficacy and safety of two 0.025% tretinoin gels: results from a multicenter, double-blind, parallel study. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1998;38:S17-S23. 155. Harper JC, Roberts WE, Zeichner JA, Guenin E, Bhatt V, Pillai R. Novel tretinoin 0.05% lotion for the once-daily treatment of moderate-to-severe acne vulgaris: assessment of safety and tolerability in subgroups. J Dermatol Treat. 2020;31(2):160-167. 156. Dunlap FE, Mills OH, Tuley MR, Baker MD, Plott RT. Adapalene 0.1% gel for the treatment of acne vulgaris: its superiority compared to tretinoin 0.025% cream in skin tolerance and patient preference. Br J Dermatol. 1998;139(Suppl 52):17-22. 157. Kakita L. Tazarotene versus tretinoin or adapalene in the treatment of acne vulgaris. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2000;43:S51.S54. 158. Webster GF, Berson D, Stein LF, Fivenson DP, Tanghetti EA, Ling M. Efficacy and tolerability of once-daily tazarotene 0.1% gel versus once-daily tretinoin 0.025% gel in the treatment of facial acne vulgaris: a randomized trial. Cutis. 2001;67:4-9. 159. Galvin SA, Gilbert R, Baker M, Guibal F, Tuley MR. Compar.ative tolerance of adapalene 0.1% gel and six different tretinoin formulations. Br J Dermatol. 1998;139(Suppl 52): 34-40. 160. Pedace FJ, Stoughton R. Topical retinoic acid in acne vulgaris. Br J Dermatol. 1971;84:465-469. 161. Christiansen JV, Gadborg E, Ludvigsen K, et al. Topical tretinoin, vitamin A acid (Airol) in acne vulgaris. A controlled clinical trial. Dermatol. 1974;148:82-89. 162. Cunliffe WJ, Caputo R, Dreno B, et al. Clinical efficacy and safety comparison of adapalene gel and tretinoin gel in the treatment of acne vulgaris: Europe and U.S. multicenter trials. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1997;36:S126-S134. 163. Krishnan G. Comparison of two concentrations of tretinoin solution in the topical treatment of acne vulgaris. Practi.tioner. 1976;216:106-109. 164. Cunliffe WJ, Dodman B, Ead R. Benzoyl peroxide in acne. Practitioner. 1978;220:479-482. 165. Fulton JE Jr, Farzad-Bakshandeh A, Bradley S. Studies on the mechanism of action to topical benzoyl peroxide and vitamin A acid in acne vulgaris. J Cutan Pathol. 1974;1:191-200. 166. Fyrand O, Jakobsen HB. Water-based versus alcohol-based benzoyl peroxide preparations in the treatment of acne vulgaris. Dermatol. 1986;172:263-267. 167. Mills OH Jr, Kligman AM, Pochi P, Comite H. Comparing 2.5%, 5%, and 10% benzoyl peroxide on inflammatory acne vulgaris. Int J Dermatol. 1986;25:664-667. 168. Mills O Jr, Thornsberry C, Cardin CW, Smiles KA, Leyden JJ. Bacterial resistance and therapeutic outcome following three months of topical acne therapy with 2% erythromycin gel versus its vehicle. Acta Derm Venereol. 2002;82:260-265. 169. Dubina MI, Fleischer AB Jr. Interaction of topical sulfaceta.mide and topical dapsone with benzoyl peroxide. Arch Dermatol. 2009;145:1027-1029. 170. Parry MF, Rha CK. Pseudomembranous colitis caused by topical clindamycin phosphate. Arch Dermatol. 1986;122:583.584. 171. Yentzer BA, Ade RA, Fountain JM, et al. Simplifying regimens promotes greater adherence and outcomes with topical acne medications: a randomized controlled trial. Cutis. 2010;86: 103-108. 172. Rosette C, Agan FJ, Mazzetti A, Moro L, Gerloni M. Cortex.olone 17alpha-propionate (clascoterone) is a novel androgen receptor antagonist that inhibits production of lipids and inflammatory cytokines from sebocytes in vitro. J Drugs Dermatol. 2019;18:412-418. 173. Kircik LH. Efficacy and safety of azelaic acid (AzA) gel 15% in the treatment of post-inflammatory hyperpigmentation and acne: a 16-week, baseline-controlled study. J Drugs Dermatol. 2011;10:586-590. 174. Murase JE, Heller MM, Butler DC. Safety of dermatologic medications in pregnancy and lactation: part I. Pregnancy. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2014;70:401.e1-401.e14; quiz 15. 175. Ly S, Kamal K, Manjaly P, Barbieri JS, Mostaghimi A. Treat.ment of acne vulgaris during pregnancy and lactation: a Narrative review. Dermatol Ther. 2023;13:115-130. 176. Perret LJ, Tait CP. Non-antibiotic properties of tetracyclines and their clinical application in dermatology. Australas J Dermatol. 2014;55:111-118. 177. Barbieri JS, Bhate K, Hartnett KP, Fleming-Dutra KE, Margolis DJ. Trends in oral antibiotic prescription in dermatology, 2008 to 2016. JAMA Dermatol. 2019;155: 290-297. 178. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Outpatient Antibiotic Prescriptions d United States, 2022. Updated November 15, 2025.. Accessed January 18, 2024. https:// www.cdc.gov/antibiotic-use/data/report-2022.html 179. Margolis DJ, Fanelli M, Kupperman E, et al. Association of pharyngitis with oral antibiotic use for the treatment of acne: a cross-sectional and prospective cohort study. Arch Derma.tol. 2012;148:326-332. 180. Bartlett JG, Chang TW, Gurwith M, Gorbach SL, Onderdonk AB. Antibiotic-associated pseudomembranous colitis due to toxin-producing clostridia. N Engl J Med. 1978;298:531-534. 181. Carroll KC, Bartlett JG. Biology of Clostridium difficile: implications for epidemiology and diagnosis. Annu Rev Microbiol. 2011;65:501-521. 182. Sanchez GV, Fleming-Dutra KE, Roberts RM, et al. Core elements of outpatient antibiotic stewardship. MMWR Re.comm Rep. 2016;65(6):1-12. 183. Nast A, Dreno B, Bettoli V, et al. European evidence-based (S3) guideline for the treatment of acne -update 2016 .short version. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2016;30: 1261-1268. 184. Oon HH, Wong SN, Aw DCW, Cheong WK, Goh CL, Tan HH. Acne management guidelines by the Dermatological Society of Singapore. J Clin Aesthet Dermatol. 2019;12:34-50. 185. Gold LS, Cruz A, Eichenfield L, et al. Effective and safe combination therapy for severe acne vulgaris: a randomized, vehicle-controlled, double-blind study of adapalene 0.1%.benzoyl peroxide 2.5% fixed-dose combination gel with doxycycline hyclate 100 mg. Cutis. 2010;85:94-104. 186. Leyden J, Thiboutot DM, Shalita AR, et al. Comparison of tazarotene and minocycline maintenance therapies in acne vulgaris: a multicenter, double-blind, randomized, parallel.group study. Arch Dermatol. 2006;142:605-612. 187. Tan J, Stein Gold L, Schlessinger J, et al. Short-term combination therapy and long-term relapse prevention in the treatment of severe acne vulgaris. J Drugs Dermatol. 2012;11:174-180. 188. Thiboutot DM, Shalita AR, Yamauchi PS, et al. Adapalene gel, 0.1%, as maintenance therapy for acne vulgaris: a random.ized, controlled, investigator-blind follow-up of a recent combination study. Arch Dermatol. 2006;142:597-602. 189. Moon SH, Roh HS, Kim YH, Kim JE, Ko JY, Ro YS. Antibiotic resistance of microbial strains isolated from Korean acne patients. J Dermatol. 2012;39:833-837. 190. Toossi P, Farshchian M, Malekzad F, Mohtasham N, Kimyai-Asadi A. Subantimicrobial-dose doxycycline in the treatment of moderate facial acne. J Drugs Dermatol. 2008;7:1149-1152. 191. Ozolins M, Eady EA, Avery AJ, et al. Comparison of five antimicrobial regimens for treatment of mild to moderate inflammatory facial acne vulgaris in the community: rando.mised controlled trial. Lancet. 2004;364:2188-2195. 192. Arowojolu AO, Gallo MF, Lopez LM, Grimes DA. Combined oral contraceptive pills for treatment of acne. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012;6:CD004425. 193. Arrington EA, Patel NS, Gerancher K, Feldman SR. Combined oral contraceptives for the treatment of acne: a practical guide. Cutis. 2012;90:83-90. 194. Harper JC. Should dermatologists prescribe hormonal con.traceptives for acne? Dermatol Ther. 2009;22:452-457. 195. Rabe T, Kowald A, Ortmann J, Rehberger-Schneider S. Inhibition of skin 5 alpha-reductase by oral contraceptive progestins in vitro. Gynecol Endocrinol. 2000;14:223-230. 196. Barbieri JS, Mitra N, Margolis DJ, Harper CC, Mostaghimi A, Abuabara K. Influence of contraception class on incidence and severity of acne vulgaris. Obstet Gynecol. 2020;135:1306-1312. 197. Lortscher D, Admani S, Satur N, Eichenfield LF. Hormonal contraceptives and acne: a retrospective analysis of 2147 patients. J Drugs Dermatol. 2016;15:670-674. 198. Davtyan C. Four Generations of Progestins in Oral Contraceptives. UCLA Comprehensive Health Program; 2012. 199. Kelly S, Davies E, Fearns S, et al. Effects of oral contraceptives containing ethinylestradiol with either drospirenone or levo.norgestrel on various parameters associated with well-being in healthy women: a randomized, single-blind, parallel.group, multicentre study. Clin Drug Investig. 2010;30:325-336. 200. Palatsi R, Hirvensalo E, Liukko P, et al. Serum total and unbound testosterone and sex hormone binding globulin (SHBG) in female acne patients treated with two different oral contraceptives. Acta Derm Venereol. 1984;64:517-523. 201. Rosen MP, Breitkopf DM, Nagamani M. A randomized controlled trial of second-versus third-generation oral contraceptives in the treatment of acne vulgaris. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2003;188:1158-1160. 202. Winkler UH, Ferguson H, Mulders JA. Cycle control, quality of life and acne with two low-dose oral contraceptives containing 20 microg ethinylestradiol. Contraception. 2004;69:469-476. 203. Jaisamrarn U, Chaovisitsaree S, Angsuwathana S, Nerapusee O. A comparison of multiphasic oral contraceptives containing norgestimate or desogestrel in acne treatment: a randomized trial. Contraception. 2014;90:535-541. 204. Thorneycroft H, Gollnick H, Schellschmidt I. Superiority of a combined contraceptive containing drospirenone to a tri.phasic preparation containing norgestimate in acne treat.ment. Cutis. 2004;74:123-130. 205. Thorneycroft IH, Stanczyk FZ, Bradshaw KD, Ballagh SA, Nichols M, Weber ME. Effect of low-dose oral contraceptives on androgenic markers and acne. Contraception. 1999;60: 255-262. 206. Stewart FH, Harper CC, Ellertson CE, Grimes DA, Sawaya GF, Trussell J. Clinical breast and pelvic examination require.ments for hormonal contraception: current practice vs evidence. JAMA. 2001;285:2232-2239. 207. Curtis KM, Jatlaoui TC, Tepper NK, et al. U.S. Selected practice recommendations for contraceptive use, 2016. MMWR Re.comm Rep. 2016;65:1-66. 208. ACOG Committee Opinion Number 540. Risk of Venous Thromboembolism Among Users of Drospirenone-Containing Oral Contraceptive Pills. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists; 2012. 209. Curtis KM, Tepper NK, Jatlaoui TC, et al. U.S. Medical eligibility criteria for contraceptive use, 2016. MMWR Recomm Rep. 2016;65:1-103. 210. Food and Drug Administration. Combined Hormonal Con.traceptives (CHCs) and the Risk of Cardiovascular Disease Endpoints. 2011. Accessed January 18, 2024. https://www. fda.gov/media/82335/download 211. Katsambas AD, Dessinioti C. Hormonal therapy for acne: why not as first line therapy? facts and controversies. Clin Dermatol. 2010;28:17-23. 212. Gierisch JM, Coeytaux RR, Urrutia RP, et al. Oral contraceptive use and risk of breast, cervical, colorectal, and endometrial cancers: a systematic review. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2013;22:1931-1943. 213. Havrilesky LJ, Moorman PG, Lowery WJ, et al. Oral contra.ceptive pills as primary prevention for ovarian cancer: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Obstet Gynecol. 2013; 122:139-147. 214. Iversen L, Sivasubramaniam S, Lee AJ, Fielding S, Hannaford PC. Lifetime cancer risk and combined oral contraceptives: the Royal College of general practitioners’ oral contraception study. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2017;216:580.e1-580.e9. 215. International Collaboration of Epidemiological Studies of Cervical Cancer, Appleby P, Beral V, Berrington de Gonzalez A, et al. Cervical cancer and hormonal contracep.tives: collaborative reanalysis of individual data for 16,573 women with cervical cancer and 35,509 women without cervical cancer from 24 epidemiological studies. Lancet. 2007; 370:1609-1621. 216. Roura E, Travier N, Waterboer T, et al. The influence of hormonal factors on the risk of developing cervical cancer and pre-cancer: results from the EPIC cohort. PLoS One. 2016; 11:e0147029. 217. ACOG practice bulletin no. 110: noncontraceptive uses of hormonal contraceptives. Obstet Gynecol. 2010;115: 206-218. 218. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists’ Committee on Health Care for Underserved Women, Contraceptive Equity Expert Work Group, Committee on Ethics. Patient-centered contraceptive counseling: ACOG Committee statement number 1. Obstet Gynecol. 2022;139:350-353. 219. Helms SE, Bredle DL, Zajic J, Jarjoura D, Brodell RT, Krishnarao I. Oral contraceptive failure rates and oral antibiotics. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1997;36:705-710. 220. London BM, Lookingbill DP. Frequency of pregnancy in acne patients taking oral antibiotics and oral contraceptives. Arch Dermatol. 1994;130:392-393. 221. ACOG Committee on Practice Bulletins-Gynecology. ACOG practice bulletin. No. 73: use of hormonal contraception in women with coexisting medical conditions. Obstet Gynecol. 2006;107:1453-1472. 222. Krunic A, Ciurea A, Scheman A. Efficacy and tolerance of acne treatment using both spironolactone and a combined con.traceptive containing drospirenone. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2008;58:60-62. 223. Bird ST, Pepe SR, Etminan M, Liu X, Brophy JM, Delaney JA. The association between drospirenone and hyperkalemia: a comparative-safety study. BMC Clin Pharmacol. 2011;11:23. 224. Creinin MD, Westhoff CL, Bouchard C, et al. Estetrol-drospir.enone combination oral contraceptive: North American phase 3 efficacy and safety results. Contraception. 2021;104:222-228. 225. Boisselle A, Dionne FT, Tremblay RR. Interaction of spirono.lactone with rat skin androgen receptor. Can J Biochem. 1979; 57:1042-1046. 226. Menard RH, Martin HF, Stripp B, Gillette JR, Bartter FC. Spironolactone and cytochrome P-450: impairment of steroid hydroxylation in the adrenal cortex. Life Sci. 1974;15:1639.1648. 227. Menard RH, Stripp B, Gillette JR. Spironolactone and testic.ular cytochrome P-450: decreased testosterone formation in several species and changes in hepatic drug metabolism. Endocrinology. 1974;94:1628-1636. 228. Rifka SM, Pita JC, Vigersky RA, Wilson YA, Loriaux DL. Interaction of digitalis and spironolactone with human sex steroid receptors. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1978;46:338-344. 229. Zouboulis CC, Akamatsu H, Stephanek K, Orfanos CE. Andro.gens affect the activity of human sebocytes in culture in a manner dependent on the localization of the sebaceous glands and their effect is antagonized by spironolactone. Skin Pharmacol. 1994;7:33-40. 230. Serafini PC, Catalino J, Lobo RA. The effect of spironolactone on genital skin 5 alpha-reductase activity. J Steroid Biochem. 1985;23:191-194. 231. Barbieri JS, Choi JK, Mitra N, Margolis DJ. Frequency of treatment switching for spironolactone compared to oral tetracycline-class antibiotics for women with acne: a retrospec.tivecohortstudy 2010-2016. J Drugs Dermatol. 2018;17:632-638. 232. Layton AM, Eady EA, Whitehouse H, Del Rosso JQ, Fedorowicz Z, van Zuuren EJ. Oral spironolactone for acne vulgaris in adult females: a hybrid systematic review. Am J Clin Dermatol. 2017;18:169-191. 233. Garg V, Choi JK, James WD, Barbieri JS. Long-term use of spironolactone for acne in women: a case series of 403 patients. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2021;84:1348-1355. 234. Shaw JC, White LE. Long-term safety of spironolactone in acne: results of an 8-year followup study. J Cutan Med Surg. 2002;6:541-545. 235. Santer M, Lawrence M, Renz S, et al. Effectiveness of spironolactone for women with acne vulgaris (SAFA) in England and Wales: pragmatic, multicentre, phase 3, double blind, randomised controlled trial. BMJ. 2023;381:e074349. 236. Zeichner JA. Evaluating and treating the adult female patient with acne. J Drugs Dermatol. 2013;12:1416-1427. 237. Liszewski W, Boull C. Lack of evidence for feminization of males exposed to spironolactone in utero: a systematic review. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2019;80:1147-1148. 238. Bommareddy K, Hamade H, Lopez-Olivo MA, Wehner M, Tosh T, Barbieri JS. Association of spironolactone use with risk of cancer: a systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA Dermatol. 2022;158:275-282. 239. Levine RM, Rasmussen JE. Intralesional corticosteroids in the treatment of nodulocystic acne. Arch Dermatol. 1983;119: 480-481. 240. Alikhan A, Sayed C, Alavi A, et al. North American clinical management guidelines for hidradenitis suppurativa: a pub.lication from the United States and Canadian Hidradenitis Suppurativa Foundations: part I: diagnosis, evaluation, and the use of complementary and procedural management. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2019;81:76-90. 241. Hochman B, Locali RF, Matsuoka PK, Ferreira LM. Intralesional triamcinolone acetonide for keloid treatment: a systematic review. Aesthetic Plast Surg. 2008;32:705-709. 242. Muneuchi G, Suzuki S, Onodera M, Ito O, Hata Y, Igawa HH. Long-term outcome of intralesional injection of triamcinolone acetonide for the treatment of keloid scars in Asian patients. Scand J Plast ReConstr Surg Hand Surg. 2006;40:111-116. 243. Riis PT, Boer J, Prens EP, et al. Intralesional triamcinolone for flares of hidradenitis suppurativa (HS): a case series. JAm Acad Dermatol. 2016;75:1151-1155. 244. Seif-El-Nasr H, El-Komy HM. Granuloma annulare. Report of a case treated successfully by intralesional triamcinolone in.jection. J Egypt Med Assoc. 1962;45:105-106. 245. Sparrow G, Abell E. Granuloma annulare and necrobiosis lipoidica treated by jet injector. Br J Dermatol. 1975;93:85-89. 246. Zouboulis CC, Bechara FG, Dickinson-Blok JL, et al. Hidrade.nitis suppurativa/acne inversa: a practical framework for treatment optimization -systematic review and recommen.dations from the HS ALLIANCE working group. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2019;33:19-31. 247. Kwon HH, Yoon JY, Hong JS, Jung JY, Park MS, Suh DH. Clinical and histological effect of a low glycaemic load diet in treatment of acne vulgaris in Korean patients: a randomized, controlled trial. Acta Derm Venereol. 2012;92:241-246. 248. Gallagher T, Taliercio M, Nia JK, Hashim PW, Zeichner JA. Dermatologist use of intralesional triamcinolone in the treatment of acne. J Clin Aesthet Dermatol. 2020;13:41-43. 249. Jansen T, Plewig G. Acne fulminans. Int J Dermatol. 1998;37: 254-257. 250. Karvonen SL. Acne fulminans: report of clinical findings and treatment of twenty-four patients. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1993; 28:572-579. 251. Villani A, Nastro F, Di Vico F, Fabbrocini G, Annunziata MC, Genco L. Oral isotretinoin for acne: a complete overview. Expert Opin Drug Saf. 2022;21:1027-1037. 252. Peck GL, Olsen TG, Butkus D, et al. Isotretinoin versus placebo in the treatment of cystic acne. A randomized double-blind study. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1982;6:735-745. 253. Farrell LN, Strauss JS, Stranieri AM. The treatment of severe cystic acne with 13-cis-retinoic acid: evaluation of sebum production and the clinical response in a multiple-dose trial. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1980;3:602-611. 254. King K, Jones DH, Daltrey DC, Cunliffe WJ. A double-blind study of the effects of 13-cis-retinoic acid on acne, sebum excretion rate and microbial population. Br J Dermatol. 1982; 107:583-590. 255. Strauss JS, Rapini RP, Shalita AR, et al. Isotretinoin therapy for acne: results of a multicenter dose-response study. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1984;10:490-496. 256. Rademaker M, Wishart JM, Birchall NM. Isotretinoin 5 mg daily for low-grade adult acne vulgaris--a placebo-controlled, randomized double-blind study. J Eur Acad Dermatol Vene.reol. 2014;28:747-754. 257. Asai Y, Baibergenova A, Dutil M, et al. Management of acne: Canadian clinical practice guideline. CMAJ. 2016;188: 118-126. 258. Gollnick HP, Bettoli V, Lambert J, et al. A consensus-based practical and daily guide for the treatment of acne patients. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2016;30:1480-1490. 259. Le Cleach L, Lebrun-Vignes B, Bachelot A, et al. Guidelines for the management of acne: recommendations from a French multidisciplinary group. Br J Dermatol. 2017;177:908-913. 260. Thiboutot DM, Dreno B, Abanmi A, et al. Practical manage.ment of acne for clinicians: an international consensus from the global alliance to improve outcomes in acne. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2018;78:S1-S23.e1. 261. Gomez-Flores M, Poletti-Vazquez DE, Garcıa-Hidalgo L, et al. [Second joint position paper: use of isotretinoin in severe acne]. Rev Med Inst Mex Seguro Soc. 2019;56:441-446. 262. Bagatin E, Costa CS, Rocha M, et al. Consensus on the use of oral isotretinoin in dermatology -Brazilian Society of Dermatology. An Bras Dermatol. 2020;95(Suppl 1):19-38. 263. Kassem B, Ismail M, Hassan F. Evaluation of the efficacy and relapse rates of treatment protocols for moderate acne using isotretinoin based on the global acne grading system: randomized, controlled, comparative study. Dermatol Ther. 2022;35:e15974. 264. Borghi A, Mantovani L, Minghetti S, Giari S, Virgili A, Bettoli V. Low-cumulative dose isotretinoin treatment in mild-to.moderate acne: efficacy in achieving stable remission. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2011;25:1094-1098. 265. Kaymak Y, Ilter N. The effectiveness of intermittent isotret.inoin treatment in mild or moderate acne. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2006;20:1256-1260. 266. Amichai B, Shemer A, Grunwald MH. Low-dose isotretinoin in the treatment of acne vulgaris. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2006;54: 644-646. 267. Kızılyel O, Metin MS, Elmas OF,C€ ¸ ayır Y, Aktas¸ A. Effects of oral isotretinoin on lipids and liver enzymes in acne patients. Cutis. 2014;94:234-238. 268. Ghaffarpour G, Mazloomi S, Soltani-Arabshahi R, Seyed KS. Oral isotretinoin for acne, adjusting treatment according to patient’s response. J Drugs Dermatol. 2006;5:878-882. 269. Evaristo L, Bagatin E. Use of oral isotretinoin to treat acne in the public system: a hospital-based retrospective cohort. Sao Paulo Med J. 2019;137:363-368. 270. Barbieri JS, Shin DB, Wang S, Margolis DJ, Takeshita J. The clinical utility of laboratory monitoring during isotretinoin therapy for acne and changes to monitoring practices over time. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2020;82:72-79. 271. Yap FB. Safety and efficacy of fixed-dose 10 mg daily isotretinoin treatment for acne vulgaris in Malaysia. J Cosmet Dermatol. 2017;16:348-352. 272. Lee YH, Scharnitz TP, Muscat J, Chen A, Gupta-Elera G, Kirby JS. Laboratory monitoring during isotretinoin therapy for acne: a systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA Dermatol. 2016;152:35-44. 273. Xia E, Han J, Faletsky A, et al. Isotretinoin laboratory monitoring in acne treatment: a Delphi consensus study. JAMA Dermatol. 2022;158:942-948. 274. Affleck A, Jackson D, Williams HC, Chavez P, Albrecht J. Is routine laboratory testing in healthy young patients taking isotretinoin necessary: a critically appraised topic. Br J Dermatol. 2022;187:857-865. 275. Dai WS, LaBraico JM, Stern RS. Epidemiology of isotretinoin exposure during pregnancy. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1992;26: 599-606. 276. Shin J, Cheetham TC, Wong L, et al. The impact of the iPLEDGE program on isotretinoin fetal exposure in an integrated health care system. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2011;65:1117-1125. 277. Collins MK, Moreau JF, Opel D, et al. Compliance with pregnancy prevention measures during isotretinoin therapy. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2014;70:55-59. 278. Committee on Practice Bulletins-Gynecology, Long-Acting Reversible Contraception Work Group. Practice bulletin No. 186: long-acting reversible contraception: implants and intrauterine devices. Obstet Gynecol. 2017;130:e251-e269. 279. Alhusayen RO, Juurlink DN, Mamdani MM, Morrow RL, Shear NH, Dormuth CR. Isotretinoin use and the risk of inflammatory bowel disease: a population-based cohort study. J Invest Dermatol. 2013;133:907-912. 280. Bernstein CN, Nugent Z, Longobardi T, Blanchard JF. Isotret.inoin is not associated with inflammatory bowel disease: a population-based case-control study. Am J Gastroenterol. 2009;104:2774-2778. 281. Crockett SD, Porter CQ, Martin CF, Sandler RS, Kappelman MD. Isotretinoin use and the risk of inflammatory bowel disease: a case-control study. Am J Gastroenterol. 2010;105:1986-1993. 282. Etminan M, Bird ST, Delaney JA, Bressler B, Brophy JM. Isotretinoin and risk for inflammatory bowel disease: a nested case-control study and meta-analysis of published and unpublished data. JAMA Dermatol. 2013;149:216-220. 283. Racine A, Cuerq A, Bijon A, et al. Isotretinoin and risk of inflammatory bowel disease: a French nationwide study. Am J Gastroenterol. 2014;109:563-569. 284. Wright S, Strunk A, Garg A. Risk of new-onset inflammatory bowel disease among patients with acne vulgaris exposed to isotretinoin. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2021;84:41-45. 285. Rashtak S, Khaleghi S, Pittelkow MR, Larson JJ, Lahr BD, Murray JA. Isotretinoin exposure and risk of inflammatory bowel disease. JAMA Dermatol. 2014;150:1322-1326. 286. Marqueling AL, Zane LT. Depression and suicidal behavior in acne patients treated with isotretinoin: a systematic review. Semin Cutan Med Surg. 2005;24:92-102. 287. Sundstrom A, Alfredsson L, Sjolin-Forsberg G, Gerden B, Bergman U, Jokinen J. Association of suicide attempts with acne and treatment with isotretinoin: retrospective Swedish cohort study. BMJ. 2010;341:c5812. 288. Chen YH, Wang WM, Chung CH, Tsao CH, Chien WC, Hung CT. Risk of psychiatric disorders in patients taking isotretinoin: a nationwide, population-based, cohort study in Taiwan. J Affect Disord. 2022;296:277-282. 289. Ugonabo N, Love E, Wong PW, et al. Psychiatric disorders and suicidal behavior in patients with acne prescribed oral antibiotics versus isotretinoin: analysis of a large commercial insurance claims database. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2021;85:878.884. 290. Jick SS, Kremers HM, Vasilakis-Scaramozza C. Isotretinoin use and risk of depression, psychotic symptoms, suicide, and attempted suicide. Arch Dermatol. 2000;136:1231-1236. 291. Siu AL, , US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF), Bibbins-Domingo K, Grossman DC, et al. Screening for depression in adults: US preventive services task force recommendation statement. JAMA. 2016;315:380-387. 292. Secrest AM, Hopkins ZH, Frost ZE, et al. Quality of life assessed using Skindex-16 scores among patients with acne receiving isotretinoin treatment. JAMA Dermatol. 2020;156: 1098-1106. 293. Bray AP, Kravvas G, Skevington SM, Lovell CR. Is there an association between isotretinoin therapy and adverse mood changes? A prospective study in a cohort of acne patients. J Dermatolog Treat. 2019;30:796-801. 294. Paljarvi T, McPherson T, Luciano S, Herttua K, Fazel S. Isotretinoin and adverse neuropsychiatric outcomes: retro.spective cohort study using routine data. Br J Dermatol. 2022; 187:64-72. 295. US Preventive Services Task Force, Mangione CM, Barry MJ, Nicholson WK, et al. Screening for depression and suicide risk in children and adolescents: US preventive services task force recommendation statement. JAMA. 2022;328:1534-1542. 296. US Preventive Services Task Force, Mangione CM, Barry MJ, Nicholson WK, et al. Screening for anxiety in children and adolescents: US preventive services task force recommenda.tion statement. JAMA. 2022;328:1438-1444. 297. Schrom K, Nagy T, Mostow E. Depression screening using health questionnaires in patients receiving oral isotretinoin for acne vulgaris. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2016;75:237-239. 298. Waldman A, Bolotin D, Arndt KA, et al. ASDS guidelines task force: consensus recommendations regarding the safety of lasers, dermabrasion, chemical peels, Energy devices, and skin surgery during and after isotretinoin use. Dermatol Surg. 2017;43:1249-1262. 299. Scopelliti MG, Kothare A, Karavitis M. A novel 1726-nm laser system for safe and effective treatment of acne vulgaris. Lasers Med Sci. 2022;37:3639-3647. 300. Alexiades M, Kothare A, Goldberg D, Dover JS. Novel 1726 nm laser demonstrates durable therapeutic outcomes and tolerability for moderate-to-severe acne across skin types. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2023;89(4):703-710. 301. Reynolds RC, Lee S, Choi JY, et al. Effect of the glycemic index of carbohydrates on Acne vulgaris. Nutrients. 2010;2:1060.1072. 302. Smith RN, Mann NJ, Braue A, Makelainen H, Varigos GA. A low-glycemic-load diet improves symptoms in acne vulgaris patients: a randomized controlled trial. Am J Clin Nutr. 2007; 86:107-115. 303. Pavithra G, Upadya GM, Rukmini MS. A randomized controlled trial of topical benzoyl peroxide 2.5% gel with a low glycemic load diet versus topical benzoyl peroxide 2.5% gel with a normal diet in acne (grades 1-3). Indian J Dermatol Venereol Leprol. 2019;85:486-490. 304. Barbieri JS, Tan JKL, Adamson AS. Active comparator trial designs used to promote development of innovative new medications. Cutis. 2020;106:E4-E6. 305. Miller J, Ly S, Mostaghimi A, Barbieri JS. Use of active comparator trials for topical medications in dermatology. JAMA Dermatol. 2021;157:597-599. 306. Gao Y, Wei EK, Arron ST, Linos E, Margolis DJ, Mansh MD. Acne, sexual orientation, and mental health among young adults in the United States: a population-based, cross-sectional study. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2017;77:971.973. 307. Pathmarajah P, Peterknecht E, Cheung K, Elyoussfi S, Muralidharan V, Bewley A. Acne vulgaris in skin of color: a systematic review of the effectiveness and tolerability of current treatments. J Clin Aesthet Dermatol. 2022;15:43-68. 308. Braun H, Zhang Q, Getahun D, et al. Moderate-to-severe acne and mental health symptoms in Transmasculine persons who have received testosterone. JAMA Dermatol. 2021;157: 344-346. 309. DeGrazia TM, Rolader R, Thiboutot DM, Yeung H. Eligibility criteria related to hormone therapy in acne clinical trials: a systematic review. J Invest Dermatol. 2021;141:189-191. 310. Becker T, Chin M, Bates N, eds. Measuring Sex, Gender Identity, and Sexual Orientation. 2022. 311. Yeung H, Luk KM, Chen SC, Ginsberg BA, Katz KA. Dermato.logic care for lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender persons: terminology, demographics, health disparities, and ap.proaches to care. JAm AcadDermatol. 2019;80:581-589. 312. Butler DC, Heller MM, Murase JE. Safety of dermatologic medications in pregnancy and lactation: part II. Lactation. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2014;70:417.e1-417.e10; quiz 27. 