 — Sounding Board relative risk of 2.03 (95% CI, 1.73 to 2.37). A meta-analysis of 27 studies examining tanning.bed exposure showed that ever (as compared with never) having used a tanning bed had a summary relative risk of 1.20 (95% CI, 1.08 to 1.34); frequent use (as compared with no use) of a tanning bed 1.42 (95% CI, 1.15 to 1.74), and first tanning bed use at an age younger than 35 years (as compared with ≥35 years of age) 1.59 (95% CI, 1.36 to 1.85).9 In short, the association between UV radia.tion and melanoma is not particularly strong, with a relative risk of approximately 2. This raises the question of whether an exposure that has a relative risk of 2 could explain an increase in the incidence of melanoma by a factor of 6. The effect of a risk factor on the observed inci.dence of cancer is a function of two variables: the strength of the association (i.e., the magni.tude of the relative risk) and the change in the proportion of the population exposed. In other words, no matter how strong a risk factor is, it can increase the incidence of cancer only if the frequency of exposure to the risk factor is in.creasing in the population. The foregoing relationship is best understood by considering a thought experiment that uses a familiar example, lung cancer. Cigarette smok.ing is strongly related to lung cancer, with a relative risk of approximately 20.10,11 Under the assumption that all other factors are held con.stant, the incidence of lung cancer would remain stable if the proportion of the population smok.ing cigarettes remained stable. On the other hand, if no one smoked initially and everyone subsequently adopted the habit, then the inci.dence would be expected to rise by a factor of approximately 20, albeit after a delay of multiple decades. This worst-case expectation — no exposure to cigarette smoking to population-wide expo.sure — is illustrated in Figure 2A; the long-term trend in the observed incidence of lung cancer is superimposed on this graph. Population expo.sure to cigarette smoking was virtually nonexis.tent at the outset of the 20th century and peaked at roughly 50% among men in the 1950s.12 The observed incidence of lung cancer increased by a factor of approximately 10, a finding that is re.markably consistent with what would be expected if an exposure had a relative risk of 20 and the percentage of the population exposed increased from 0% to 50%. Cigarette consumption subse.quently fell, and after the requisite delay, so too did the incidence of lung cancer. Figure 2B shows the worst-case expectation for UV exposure and melanoma in which no one has a history of se.vere sunburn in 1975 and everyone has a history of severe sunburn in 2017. Even under this im.plausibly extreme scenario of increased UV ex.posure, the incidence of melanoma would be expected only to double. Given that the observed incidence has increased by a factor of 6, alterna.tive explanations must be considered. It’s Not UV Exposure, It’s Diagnostic Scrutiny We believe that increased diagnostic scrutiny (i.e., the combined effect of more screening skin examinations, falling clinical thresholds to bi.opsy pigmented lesions, and falling pathological thresholds to label the morphologic changes as cancer) is the primary driver of the rapid rise in melanoma diagnoses. Figure 3A shows that the proportion of fee-for-service Medicare beneficia.ries who had undergone at least one skin biopsy had risen from less than 5% in 2004 to over 8% n engl j med 384;1 nejm.org January 7, 2021 The new england journal of medicine Figure 2. Expected Change in the Incidence of Cancer after Population-wide Exposure to a Known Risk Factor, as Compared with Observed Incidence. Panel A shows the expected incidence of lung cancer among men on the ba.sis of a thought experiment in which population-wide exposure to cigarette smoking (an exposure with a relative risk of 20) is used as the worst-case scenario, with all other factors held constant. Observed incidence data were obtained from the Connecticut Tumor Registry (1935–1974) and the SEER Program (1975–2017). Panel B shows the expected incidence of cutaneous melanoma among men and women on the basis of a thought experiment in which population-wide exposure to severe sunburn (an exposure with a relative risk of 2) is used as the worst-case scenario, with all other factors held constant. Observed incidence data come from the SEER Program. in 2017.13 Although this metric does not disen.tangle the frequency of skin examinations from the threshold to biopsy, it does reveal their com.bined effect. As the proportion of persons who had undergone a biopsy had nearly doubled in the fee-for-service Medicare population, so too did the incidence of melanoma in the population of adults 65 years of age or older. The two denominators, however, are not pre.cisely the same. Medicare beneficiaries are in.creasingly opting out of fee-for-service — enroll.ment in Medicare Advantage plans grew from 13% to 33% of all Medicare beneficiaries over the period from 2004 through 2017.14 No biopsy data are available for persons with Medicare Advantage plans. It is theoretically possible that, for example, no relationship exists between the proportion of persons who undergo a biopsy and the incidence of melanoma in the Medicare Ad.vantage population. Figure 3B shows falling pathological thresh.olds for diagnosing melanoma. When a contem.porary group of nine dermatopathologists re.viewed 40 skin-biopsy specimens that were used for diagnosis two decades earlier, many that were originally diagnosed as benign would now be diagnosed as melanoma, whereas very few mela.noma diagnoses would be downgraded.15 The study focused on distinguishing benign “dys.plastic” nevi from thin melanomas, a diagnostic gray zone where upgrading would be expected to be most apparent. The mean number of mela.noma diagnoses by the dermatopathologists was 18 — a 64% increase from the original 11 mela.noma diagnoses. In fact, in seven instances, the same pathologist interpreting the same slide two decades later upgraded the diagnosis from be.nign to melanoma. This study highlights an inconvenient truth: absent metastasis, no definitive diagnostic crite.ria for the pathological diagnosis of melanoma exist. Because the diagnosis is subjective, pathol.ogists disagree about whether melanoma is pres.ent, particularly when faced with lesions in the diagnostic gray zone.16,17 In addition, they are increasingly evaluating small, ambiguous lesions; nearly 90% of melanomas are now thin (<1.0 mm in thickness) (Fig. S2 in the Supplementary Ap.pendix, available with the full text of this article at NEJM). A combination of subjective criteria, increased frequency of ambiguous lesions, and asymmetric incentives (penalties for underdiag.nosing but not for overdiagnosing) may explain the lower pathological threshold to diagnose melanoma. n engl j med 384;1 nejm.org January 7, 2021 Sounding Board Figure 3. Increased Diagnostic Scrutiny for Cutaneous Melanoma. Panel A shows the annual percentage of fee-for-service Medicare beneficiaries who underwent at least one skin biopsy (according to the Dartmouth Atlas Data)13 and the incidence of melanoma among persons 65 years of age or older (SEER Program) from 2004 through 2017. The data points for the intervening years from 2004 to 2017 are consecu.tive from left to right — that is to say, the percentage of Medicare beneficiaries undergoing a biopsy has increased each year. Panel B shows a study of 40 biopsy specimens that were originally evaluated in 1988 through 1990 that were reevaluated by nine dermatopathologists two decades later. Original melanoma diagnoses were rarely down.graded, whereas original benign diagnoses were frequently upgraded. Diagnostic scrutiny is also increased by the growing tendency of dermatologists to refer bi.opsy specimens to their own pathology labora.tories. The growth in self-referral has been documented by the Government Accountability Office (GAO), which reported that approximately a third of dermatologists self-referred in 2010.18 Furthermore, their investigation found that self.referral was associated with an increased volume of biopsies: dermatologists who switched from referring specimens elsewhere to self-referral had a 24% increase in the use of anatomical pathol.ogy services over 2 years, whereas the use of anatomical pathology services by dermatologists who did not switch stayed about the same. The GAO concluded, “financial incentives for self.referring providers were likely a major factor driving the increase.” Self-referral is further mo.tivated by the growing corporatization of derma.tology, whereby private equity investors acquire and consolidate practices19 and then maximize profitability by having the larger practices open their own pathology laboratories.20 Population-based measures of cancer burden provide further evidence that the rapid rise in the incidence of cutaneous melanoma is driven largely by increased diagnostic scrutiny. The diag.nosis of melanoma in situ has become particu.larly common; the incidence of melanoma in situ is now 50 times as high as it was in 1975 (25 vs. 0.5 per 100,000 population). However, as shown in Figure 4A, the rising detection and treatment of melanoma in situ has failed to reduce the incidence of invasive melanoma, which increased from 7.9 to 25.4 per 100,000 population over the same period. The lack of any appreciable effect in reducing the occurrence of invasive melanoma suggests that melanoma in situ is not a regular precursor — much less an obligate precursor — of invasive melanoma. Figure 4B shows that melanoma mortality has been generally stable, whereas the incidence of melanoma has been rising steeply. Stable mortality should be viewed as a marker for sta.ble true cancer occurrence; thus, when accompa.nied by steeply rising incidence, the pattern should be viewed as pathognomonic for overdi.agnosis.21 Not apparent in Figure 4B is the small but real decline in mortality over the past few years. Although it is tempting to attribute this welcome news to early detection, its timing co.incides with treatment breakthroughs including checkpoint-blockade immunotherapies and tar.geted therapies for metastatic melanoma.22 n engl j med 384;1 nejm.org January 7, 2021 The new england journal of medicine Figure 4. Summary Trends in Cutaneous Melanoma in the United States from 1975 through 2017. Panel A compares the incidence of invasive melanoma with that of melanoma in situ. Panel B compares the inci.dence of melanoma with melanoma mortality. Incidence data are from the SEER Program, SEER 9 Registries (five states [Connecticut, Hawaii, Iowa, New Mexico, and Utah] and four metropolitan areas [Atlanta, Detroit, San Francis.co, and Seattle]). All ages are included, and all incidence rates are age-adjusted to the 2000 U.S. standard population. Mortality data are from the National Vital Statistics System maintained by the National Center for Health Statistics. The incidence of cutaneous melanoma that is metastatic at first detection has been rising in recent years. Although this rise could be consis.tent with an increase in true cancer occurrence, a rise of similar magnitude has been seen for metastatic noncutaneous melanoma (Fig. S1), a disease that has had an overall stable incidence. This constellation of findings suggests upstaging, in which more intensive diagnostic evaluation and increasingly sensitive tests are able to detect tiny metastases not identified in earlier years — in this case, because of the growing use of positron-emission tomography combined with computed tomography.23,24 The Cycle of Melanoma Overdiagnosis Despite the best of intentions by all parties, in.creased diagnostic scrutiny can produce a cycle of increasing overdiagnosis and intervention in any disease with a reservoir of subclinical forms.25 Melanoma is no exception (Fig. 5). As the disease becomes apparently more common, people have responded by having a lower threshold to seek evaluation for pigmented lesions. Driven by a fear of missing cancer, medicolegal concerns, and patient anxiety, primary care practitioners have responded by having a lower threshold to refer to dermatologists, and dermatologists, by having a lower threshold to biopsy. The lower threshold to diagnose melanoma among dermatopatholo.gists only aggravates the problem of more mela.noma diagnoses. The apparent increase in the number of cases detected and the apparent improvement in the outcome per case detected reinforce both the need for and the apparent value of increased diagnos.tic scrutiny, thus encouraging more screening in the future. Heightened awareness, due to both the promotion of skin examinations and the fact that individuals are now more likely to know some.one with the disease, further fuels the cycle. Breaking this cycle will be difficult. Some will argue that the cycle need not be broken and that the benefits of helping even a few people far outweigh the harms of melanoma overdiagnosis, particularly because the morbidity associated with treatment (excision) is modest as compared with other cancers. We would counter that there is no evidence that this cycle helps patients and that, in fact, there is good evidence that it does not; despite all the additional detection over the past 40 years, melanoma mortality did not change until the advent of improved treatment for meta.static disease. n engl j med 384;1 nejm.org January 7, 2021 Sounding Board Figure 5. The Cycle of Melanoma Overdiagnosis. The American Academy of Dermatology has designated May as “Skin Cancer Awareness Month” and the first Monday in May as “Melanoma Monday.” Furthermore, it is a mistake to consider the harm as only the morbidity associated with un.needed treatment. A diagnosis of cancer makes a person feel vulnerable and undermines an im.portant component of health: resilience.26,27 In this country, it also makes a person poorer28 and may affect the ability to obtain life or health insurance (short-term plans can now deny cover.age for preexisting conditions). In addition, the harms extend well beyond those with cancers that are overdiagnosed. For every melanoma diag.nosis, more than 10 pigmented lesions are biop.sied.29 Persons who undergo biopsy or excision of benign nevi receive no benefit but nonetheless face the harms of scarring, wound infection, out-of-pocket costs, and the prospect of frequent surveillance. Surveillance is now such a common component of dermatologic practice that it prob.ably produces an unintended side effect: imped.ing access for those with symptomatic skin disease. We view the rise in the incidence of melanoma as a sentinel event, a warning that an epidemic of inspection, surveillance, and biopsy of pigmented skin lesions is permeating through the general population. Breaking the Cycle A variety of strategies will be required to reduce melanoma overdiagnosis. An obvious activity to curtail is the self-referral of skin-biopsy speci.mens for histologic examination, as suggested in the president’s budget proposal.30 It is unclear whether having dermatologists refer specimens to their own pathology laboratories provides any patient benefit; what is clear is that self-referral increases biopsy rates and thus the likelihood of melanoma overdiagnosis. More generally, dermatopathologists should reverse their tendency of lowering thresholds to diagnose melanoma. When faced with ambigu.ous lesions (e.g., those with features that fall between a dysplastic nevus and melanoma in situ), they have tended to err on the side of cancer — and blame lawyers in the process, typically un.der the guise of “medicolegal concerns.”31 It is time for pathologists either to reassert their role as the arbitrator of whether a lesion is melano.ma or not and accept an inherent misdiagnosis rate or to explicitly acknowledge that this de.marcation is no longer possible. Pathologists could also pursue linguistic de-escalation, specifically for melanoma in situ. A diagnosis of “melanocytic neoplasm” would be less distressing for patients and could reduce continued surveillance and overtreatment.32 There is precedent for this: some papillary thyroid car.cinomas are now labeled thyroid neoplasms.33 Dermatologists and primary care practitioners need to work to raise their threshold to biopsy. A simple approach would be to return to the threshold used in the past, that is, not to biopsy pigmented lesions with a diameter smaller than that of a pencil eraser (6 mm).34 Overdiagnosis is expected to most likely occur in melanomas that are small, and small pigmented lesions are ex.traordinarily common. Unfortunately, new diagnostic technologies are now being used in skin examinations, which may further increase diagnostic scrutiny. The n engl j med 384;1 nejm.org January 7, 2021 